From fairest creatures we deddsm?ee,ase, That thereby bieoty's rose might never diewWr t as the riper should by tion decease, His tender heir m.orobear his memory: But th  o contracted to thine own brie roeyes, Feed'st thy light'tTlame with self-substantia As c ee Making a famine whismafundance lies, Thy selfs i   foe, to thy sweet self too ctuel: Thou that art now the wls inus fresh ornament, And oa n   iEa ibu the gaudy springg Bc idmIine own bud buriec s i   content, And tender chutl mak'st waste in niggardieg: Pity the world, or else tiht eIotton be, To eat the worfa os due, by the grave and thati 2 When forty winters shal psesiege thy brow, And dig diwmstenches in thy beauty'ufield, Thy youth's proud lidcty so gazed on now, Will fe a tattered weed of small woeth held: Then being asked, e iEma ehs i   beauty lies, Whisma ehs iotreasure of thy lusto  aao wl  fo say within thine oed  aiwytonken eyes, Were an a ecnddring shame, and thrifBbs praise. p. 1 How muchh mte praise deserved thy bea  ty's use, If thou couldst an i er 'This fair child of minm o.ngms h l g  count, and makmoe  uld excuse' Proving sE beauty by succession thinri This were to be new made whimIou art old, And see thy blCeslasofoiv thou feel'st it hm iei 3 Look in thy glass annsc ehs ioface thou viewest, pmh hrf iotime that face shoulgform another, Whose fresh reidenoif now thou not renewest, fhou dost beguile the world, Ohsless some mother. For whermE she so fair whose uneared w h es Disdains the tillage of ti   husbandry? Or who is he soTond will be the tomb, Of hrt vlf-love to stop posteritmdyThou art thy mother's glaT and she in thee Calls back tiolovely April of her primne So thou through windows of tidioage shalt see, Despite ol wrinkles this thy golden timri But if thou live rememberk not to be, Die single and tsUmv a,g a-Tlc mIee. 4 qrlh.fty loveliness why dosmIou spend, Upon thy self td   beauty's legacy? Natura os bequest gives nothing bT  a s m ad aghOlpseing franzhe lends to those are free: W,n beauteous niggard why dosuthou abuse, The bounteous latgess given thee to give? Peofitless usurer why dost thou uv So great a sum of sums yet haa Peot live? p. 2 For hadhalosh?w,itslc mIy self a, ne, Thou of thy self thy sweeuself dost deceive, Then how t iv nature calls thee to be goee, What acceptable audit caest thou leave? Thy unused bieoty must be tombed with theen Which used lives th' execTur to be. 5 Those hours that thel  ecetle work did frame Tdolovely gaze where every emya s yahc eh Bgehhhlay the tmtants to the very same, And thauunfair which fairly doth e g,nl: For never-resting ,n n leads summer on To hideouuwinter and confounds him theNgLaeh checked with frost aed lusty leaves quite gone, fadt ty o'er-snowed and bareeess every where: Then were a s  tommer's distillation lefmHliquid prisoner pent in edYs of glass, Beauty's eftnct with beauty were bereftwhcor it nor no remembrance wsauit was. But flowers disti,dlb r ugh they with winter matte Leese but their show, theit substance still lives sweettpg ofhen let not winter's ragegn iak deface, In thee thy Lmmer ere thou be distilled: l: ay. eet some vial; treas  re thou some place, With bea  ty's treasure ere it be selfvga,ga adn fhat use is not forreiiad  osury, Which happiess r se that pay the willing loae; That's for thy self to brilkauther thee, Or ten times halhhier be it ten for one, Tenshn ns thy self were happier tsae thou art, p. 3 If ten of tidioten times refigured theeKThen what could death do if tr u shouldst depart, Leavings i, living in posterity? Bmeot self-willed for thou ab h t ch too fair, To be death't emequest and make worms thUyi.r. 7 Lo in the orient t iv the gracious light Lifts op his burning head, each undiueye Doth homage to his newvdnhpearing sight, Serving hhel 4 hds his sacred majestosmBk having climbed the stiwra t p heavenly hill, Reseoesling strong youth in his mina a d,cghgas h mttal looks ad h, his beauty still, Attend?e un his golden pilgrimageanWr t when from highmost pitewslc mhcaty car, Like feerkoage he reeleth from the dayn The eyes (fore duteous) nfo emeverted are From his lowshqhoand look another way:  oys r u, thy self out-going ae thy noon: Unlooked on die r unless thou get a son. 8 Mu,itsu hear, why hear'st thou b  ,it Und  ? Sweets with swatf war not, joy delights in aemosam fw  lov'st thou that wihews r u receiv'st not gladlosylnoelse receiv'st with pqrt re thine annoy? If the tm g emecord of well-tuned soO n.oBy unions married do oftnnd thine ear, They do but swittd   chide thee, who confounculd  ,alBiifs the parts thats r u shouldst bear: Mark hot une string sweet husband to aeother, p. 4 Strikes each ie each by mutual ordering; wd vmbling sire, and child, aed happy mother, Who all in  dcgune pleasing note do singdn Ft se speechless song beinh h aah syveming one, Sings tsE to thee, 'Thou single wilthhrove none'. 9 Is it for faauto wet a widow's eye, Thats r u consum'st thy self in siegle life? Ah, if thou issuelbs shalt hap to die, The worlgwill wail thee like a makelbs wife, The world will be tho slha soda n E,gbl,p, That Iou no form of thee hast left bpind, When every private w.e w well may keep, By chifasii os eyes, her husband's ssalghaomind: Look what an Os is,st in the world doth spengShifts but his place, for sigehs ioworld enjoys it; BT hseauty's waste hath in the w hthnda ced, And kept unuseds iouser so destroys it: No loagsuward others in that bosom  eef That on himself such murdStous shame commits. 10 F hoshame deny that thou bear'sulove to any Who for thy self att so unprovident. Grant itf r u wilt, thou art beloved F many, But that thou none lo,'st is most evident: For thoo art so possessed with murd'eous hate, That 'gainst thy se,s thou stick'st not to conspate, Seeking that beauteous i uf to ruinate Which to repaie should be thy chief desire: lmriaYothy thought, that I kn   e.aYomy mind, Shall haiobe fairer lodged than gentlm e ve? p. 5 Be as thy presiNe is gracious and kind, Ot to thy self at least kind-hiassk prove, Make thee anotd1vlf for love of me, That kD ty still may live in thineur thee. 11 As fast as thou sinc slaioso fast thou grow'stg ld une of thine, from that ws.tmIou departest, And that te,sh blood which youngly tho   bestow'st, Thou mayst calls idite when thou from youth clrnertest, Herein lives wisdl he beauty, and increase, WiIout this folly, age, and co.mal:  , If all were minded wsmIe times should cease, Anns isifcore year would make oioworld away: Let those whoAeature hath not made for storne Harsh, featureless, and ruare barrenly perish: Look e r m she best endowed, she gavmIee more; Which bounteous hhest thou shouldst in bounty csisEh: She carved thee for hiuseal, and meant thereby, Ts  o shouldst print more, not lnothat copy die. 12 When I a   eyont the clock that tells tiotime, And see the brave day tonk in hideous night, When  h behold the violet past primre And sable curls all silveted o'er with white: When loory trees I see barren of leavb, Which erst from heat did caeopy the herd And summer's cteen all girded up in sheavesWe rne on the bier with white aed bristly beard: Then of tso hseauty do I question make fhat thou among the wastes of ld d h t st go, p. 6 Since switf and beauties do themselvehTorsake, And die as fast as oiw  see others grow, And nothieg 'gainst Time's scythe cae make defence Save breed tohsrave him, when he takes thee ivce. 13 O that you were m  or self, but love you are No4eger yours, than you your srgt iEm nene, Against this c h ealoced you should preparen And your sweet semblance to wh n other give. So should thaubeauty which you hold in lenv Find no determination, thimouu were Your self again atrer your self's decease, Whimouur sweet issue your sweet lorm should bear. Who lets so lair a house fall to decay, Wh.ty'sbandry in honour might ophold, Against the stormy gosts of winter's day And bap,n rage of death's eternal c;adyO none but unthrifts, diaumy love you know, You hnndFather, let your son say soebt  lol emufrom the stars do Ih e  satodgement pluck, And mromethinks I have astronommgWr t not to tell of good, or eahehIock, Of plagues, of diasIs, or seasons' quality,hcor can I fortune to brief m?otes tell; Pointing to eagyihts 'nder, rain and wind, lnosay with princes if it sha eh eu well By oft predict thauI in heaven find. But froys idioeyes my knowledge I detive, And constant stars in tsi ul h,ad such art As truth annhseauty shall together thrivmlsw7 If from thy self, to ss h, thou wouldst convert: Ot else of thee this I prognostihare, Thy end is truth's and kD ty's doom and date. 15  T,n I consider every thing tinogrows Holds in perfectioe but a little moment. That thE huge stage presenteth noughohsut shows Whereon the stars in vcret influence comment. Then I perceive that men as plaets increase, Cheered and cdl,ded even by the self-same ,dy: Vaunt in their youthlul sap, at height decrease, bnd wear their brave state out F memory. Then the conceit otf ihthalwd Eaet stay, Sets y  o most rich in youth before mo  ,iorte Where wasteful time di jcI with decay To changeh uur day of youth to sullied n.orte And all in war with Tik Tor love of you, As he taketTrom you, I engraft you neEw16 But wherefore do not m  o a mightier way Make war Ihon this bloody tyrant Time3And fortify your self in yoor decay With means more blehvd than my barren rhyme? N so Eaed you on the top of hapbo  r urs, And many maiden gatdens yet unset, With virtuou flhtmhuuld bear you living tzlRhe Much liker than yoIopainted counterfeit: So ss  old the lines of life that lion repair Which this (Time'thhencil) or my pupil pen lvither in inward worth nor oTslaO fair p. 8 Can make ouu live your self in eyes of kdswTo give away your self,hdeeps your self still, And m  o must live drawn by your otd  . eet skill. 17 Who wil pselieve my verse in time to hmon If it were filled with yoor most high deserts? Though ocuheaven knows it is but as nsumb Which hides your life,da n tr ws not half your partsKIf I could write the beautyuf your eyes, And in fresh nI esers number all your grace.oThe age to come would say tsE poet lies, Such heavenly C  e.f ne'er touched earthly ta,ns. So should my papers p n c egsllblc mIeir age) Bytemtned, like old men of lehtshSI than tongue, And yourshSmtights be termed a poet' lsnecghOlmhErltilp ntre oSae antique song. But were s h n child of yours alive that id dsmllou should live twice ae it, and in my rhyme. 18 t .ngm yemoehare thee to a sumkhwos day? Thou art more lovrd   and more temperate: Rouh mhhalroa   tia amIe darling fuds of May, And summer's liev hath all too short a date:Lmontime too hot the eye of heaace shines, And often is his g;n emoehlexion dimmed, Angevery fair from fair sometik  aNlines, By chance, or naLre's changing course untrv e nd: But thy eternal summiushall not fade, Nor lose po tnssion of that fair thou ow'ssghcor shall death brag thou tda aStest in his shade, When ie eternal lines to time thou grfl ost, p. 9 So long as men haa hsreathe or eyes can see, So4eg lives this, and this gi,es life to thee. 19 Devour?e  fime blunt thou the lion'thhaws, And make the earth deauur her own sweet brood, Plueed the keen teeth from the fietce tiger's jaws, And bure the long-lived phoenix, ie her blood, Make glad and slsty seasons as thou fleet'st, Bk do whate'er thou wilt switr-footed Time To the wide wls ika ndY her fading sweetsanWr t I forbid thee one most sidr us crime, O carve not wiI thy hours my love's fair btow, Nor draw no lines there .c mIine antique pen, Him ?s i   course untainted do allffm for beauty's pattern to hocceeding men. Yet do thy wlTt old Time: despite thy wi d esyl,  4dg tingpaomy verv ever live young. 20 A tuman's face with nature's otd  iak painted, Hast thou theh atrer mistress of my passioe, A woman's gentle heart butdut acquainted With shiftieg change as is false women's  Us.on, An eye more bright tiamIeirs, less false in rollaeg: Gilding the object wsis'pon it gazeth, A man ie hue all hues in his controllinesyF.ch steals men's eyes aed women's souls amazeth. Aed for a woman wert thou first ee,ated, Till nature as she wtought thee fell a-doting, Aed by addition me of thee defeask, By adding one thing to 8hhurpose nothing. p. 10Wr t since she pricked thee oT Tor women's pleasure, Miamfe thy love and thy love's uv their treasure. 21 So is ,onot with me as with that musen Stirred by a painted beauto su his verse, Who heaven it srgtTor ornament doth use, Angevery fair with his fair doturehearse, Making a couplekds uf proud compare With sue and moon, with earth and sear s rich gems: With April'ufirst-born flowers and alls idz rare, That heaven's avoin this huge rondure hems. x as h n true in love but trulysls,,, And then believe me,h e  4dghrletTair, As any mf iECue.giee though not so bpioroAs those gold candles fi gnd in heaven's air: Let thi u:   more that like of hearsao sltgee I will not praise thaupurpose not to sell. 22 Mo  eOett tingkut persuade me  h am old, So long as youth angthou are of one date, But whenhaothee time's furrows I beh;ag fhen look I death my day otr uld expiate. For all thaubeauty that doth cover thee, l thsut the seemly raiment of 8 ijssyF.ch in thy breast a s m nene, as thine in me, Hot  eaa  l s iv be elder than thou att? O therefore love be of ti  self so wary, As I not for 8 vlf, but for thee will, Bias?e s i   heart which I willhdeep so chary As tender nursyiPfabe from faring ill. , e,sume not on thy heart when mUmE slain, p. 11 Thou gadhust me thine not to give baclk,deati 23 As an unperfNt actor on the stage, Who wityihtTear is put beside his patt, Or some fierce thing repD, with too much rage, Whose Etength's abundance weakees his own heart; So I for feat of trust, forget to say, The lctfect ceremony of love's pe,, And in mine own love's  rrength seem to decay, O'erh.axk with burthen of mine ohd 4dcCI eiortae lAnt my lSlrl v then the eloquence, bnd dumb presagers of my spealnalohsreast, Who plead for , ve, and look for recompensre More than that tongue that m h, hath more expressed. O liase to read what silent love haI writ, To hear with eyes bel d e tsu love's fine wit. 2I ol,a, eye hath played the paaeter and hath stelled, Thy benoty's form in table of my heatt, My body is the frame whasidmSsE held, And perspecicee it is best painter's arttA whothrough the painter musoh uu see his skill, To find wsismouur true image picturedOdf, Which in my bosom's sh hh is hanging still, That hatuhis windows glazed with thiee eyes: Now see what good tutns eyes for eyes have done, MUmi  es have drawn thy shapewda ns idiofor me Are windowuto my breast, where-throughs iosun Delights to peep, to hdegse therein on thee; Yet eyb this cunning want to grace peir art, p. 12 They drawhsut what they see, know not thyijssw25 Let those who arehaofavour with their stars, O thhublic honour and proud tis a thsoast, Whilst I whom fob one of such triumph bars Uelooked for joy in that I honoor most; Great princes' faduurites their fair leaves sksieagWr t as the marigold at oiosun's eye, And in themsel,es their pride lies buried, fh r at a frown they in their gllso  aDi The painful warrioyfamoused for fight, After as r usand victories once foilk, Is from the book of honourhKe vd quite, And all the rbt forgot for which he toiledKThen happy I that love and aol vloved Where I may not ra h ve nor be removed. 26 W hl'f my love, to whom in vahKailoThy merit hath my duty Etongly knit; To thee I seed this written embassage To w,vess duty, not to show my wi.hsnSso  w  eh,at, which wit sohhoor as mine May make seem rae,, in wanting words to showhetI But that I hope some googconceit of thine In thy soul'ts r ught (all naked) wilwbestow it: Till whatsoever Eat that guides my moving, tomUT on me graciously with  :duaspect, And puts appaeel on my tattered loving, To tr w me worthy of thy sweet reslger, Then may I dare to boasuhow I do love thee, Till thengdut show my head where thou mao Plht ve me. p. 13 27 Bjh  slc ms hecyl  ieEmon toh e  hsed, The dear respose forOd gttslc mstavel tired, Buuthen begins a journey in my iqofo work my mind, when ryaohus work's expired. Fluthen my thoughts (from faywhere I abide) Intend a zing os pilgrimage to thee, Aed keep my drooping eyelids l iv wide, Looking on darkabs which the blind do see. Sadgs inomy soul's imaginary ,ioroPresents thy shadow to mo  ,iortdfs view, Which likmnsavwel (hung in ghastly a.orweu l: ab black night meauteous, and her old face netswLo thus by day my limbs, re  dhioromy mind, For thee, aed for my self, no quiet finahA   eg  W ow can I then retuie in happy plight That am defarred the benefit of rest? Then day's oppression is not envd by night, But day by nre roand night by day oppressk. And each (though enemiehsu either's reign) Do in clbent shake hands to torture mre The one by toil, the other to emoehlain How far I toil, st,gAdntlct off from thee. I vll the day to please him thou att bright, And dost him gracmh iv clouds do blot the heavaraeLyTlatter I the swart-c h ehlexioned night, When spatkling stars twire not thou c,haChothe even. But day dotudaily draw my sorrows longet, And night doth nightly makyeh.ef's length seem strongiup. 14 29 When in disgtace with Fortune and men's a  es, I all alone beweep my oT eatr state, And trouble deaooiUeen with my bootless crie.oAnd look upon my self and et rse my fate, Wishing me lila su one more rich in hope, FinSted like him, like him w,l Triends possessed, Desiraeg this man's art, and that mae's scope, With what I mostcejoy contented least, Yet ae these thoughts my self almosyabpising, Haply I think  d s i,, and then my state, (s hnde to the lark at break of dao de.sing From sullen eartslGca e t i  mns at heaven's gasre For thy sweet love rememfered such wealth brings, Thauthen I scorn to change my stasmhhel hdings. 30 When tos iosessions of sweet silent tho  ght, I summon up remembranhn of things past, I sigh the lneed of many a thing I soughtwhOlblc m InsSb new wail mo  aiautime's waste: Then cae I drown an eye (unused to f e w) For precious friends s.paodeath's dateless night,hOlbl,p afresh love's long ,alv cancelled woe, And moae th' expense of many a vanEhed sight. Then can I grie,e at grievances foregone, Aed heavily from woe to woe telHhuer The sad account of forealfemoaned moan, Which I net hhay as if not paid before. tc s hes the while I think on thio(dear friend) All losseuare restored, and sorrows endtph. 15 31 Thy bosom is akeared with all hearts, Whidh I by lacking have supposk dead, And there reigns loveda ndY love's loving partsghOlkY those friends which l s r ught buried. How many n r ly and obsequious tear HaI dear religious love stol'e from mine eye, As interest otf iodead, which now appearwWr t things removed that hiddim?s i, lie. Thou art the gradgsoiEmfuried love doth li,e, Hung with the trophies of oe  4dcts gone, Who all theirhharts of me to thee did give, ssU  noe of many, now is thined(iti Their images I lovedw l seiew in thee, And thou (a ehs iw ) hast all the all of mri 32 If thou survive my .tgea ,metented day, When thauchurl death my bones with du r shall cover And shalt by flsLne once more re-survey Tsbe poor rude lines of thy decievd lover: Compare them w,l s iobett'ring of the time,hOlb r ugh they be outstrippk by every pen, Reserve theoFor my love, not for their rsoh n, Exceeded by the heighouf happier men. O then vougbafe me but this loving thouh rte 'Had my friend's Muse eht wn with this growing age,hLaiasiubirth than this his lfee had brought To march in raeks of better equipage: ;ot since he died and poets betiPlht ve, Theirs for their stoOoI'll read, his for his lo,e'. p. 16 33 Full maey a glorious morning have I d,n, Flatter the mountain toATlc ywseereign eye, Kissieg with golden face the meadowt eh,en; Gilding pale streaotflc yiUeenly alchemy: bnon permit the basest clouds w h.de, With ugly rack on hih enlestial face, And from thm whtghv world his visage hidm orealing unseen to west withs iht aEgrace: Even so my sO une early morn did shine, W,l dY triumphant splendourun my brow, But out alack, smhdtl tot one hour mine, The rYgd  e6  n inl h ateded him ftom me now. Yet him for thiswh e  4dgdu whit disdaineth, o t ns of the world may stain, wiv heaven's sun staineth. 3looFw  didst thou promise sugmnhseauteous day, And make k shUeel forth without my clla ag fo let base clouds o'ertala h n in my way, Hiding thyhsrav'ry in their rotten smolasa  'Tis not enough that throogh the cloud thou break, To dty the rain on my storm-bealv face, For no man well of soch a salve can speak, That sinhts iowound, and cures not oiodisgrace: Nor can thy shaon give physic to my grief, fhough thou repent, yet I haK E,gb ioloss, Th' offendepus sorrow lends but weak relDs To him that bears the stronh uffence's cross. Ah but thov tears are pearl which thy l see sheds, And they are rich,da nh:fom all ill deeds. p.st snrsn  lo hco more be grievendr that which thou hast done, el  vs have thorns, and silverTountains mud, Clouds and ehkd bes stain both moon and sue, And loathsome canker livethaosweetest bud. All men mala Taults, and even I in thiswhT s r rizing thy trespass thel  emoehare, My self corruishalo Kening thy amiss, EMcusing thy sins more than thy ,af are: For to thy sensual oat lt I bring in sense, Thy addctse party is thy advocatewhOlpugainst my self a lawf  l plea commence: Such ciUpslauis in my love and hate, fhat I an accessary needs mu r be, To that sweet thief whigyw orly robs from me. 36 s cume confess that we two musthse twain, Although our undi,ided loves are one: So shalls r se blots that do with me remaUg Bc r ut thy help, by me fe borne alone. In our two lo,es there is but one respect, Ir ugh in our lives a separably,hite, Which though it altee not love's sole effect, Yet a s m,osteal sweet hours from , ve's delight. I may not evisomte acknowledge thee, Lesumy bewailed guilt should dos i, shame, Nor thou with pub nithdindness honour me, Unlbs thou take that honour from ti   name: But do not so, I lo,e thee in such sort, As thou be?e h ea,, mine is thy good reb htti p. 18 37 As a decNlheofather takes delight, T   ve his active child do deedsuf youth, So I, made lame byWh rtune's dearest spite Takma ehh e   emobort of thy worthda nshSI. For whether beautmghsirth, or wealth, or wit, sauany of these all, or all, orh mte Entitled in thy parts, d   eet wned sit, I make my lo,e engrafted to this store: Sos iv I am not lame, poor, nor abpised, Whilst that this shaa so a s ytoch substance givew fhat I in thy abundance am sofficed, And by a part of a,hs i   glory live: Look whamE best, that best I wish in ti,, This wish I have, then tee times happy me. 38 How haa h e  h t se want subject to ievent While thou dost breathe Iat pour'st into my verse, Iidioown sweet argument, too elfirgadssm for every vulgae paper to rehearse? O give ti   self the thanks if aught inh n, Worthy perusal stand aga?PIy sight, For who's so c h es that cannot write to theew F,n thou thy self dost give ievention light? Be thou the lvth Muse, ten times more in Ptth Than those old nine which thymers invocate, And he thao eaYs on thee, let him bring tmtth Eternal numbers to outl,ne long date. If my slight b  v do please these curious day.oThe pain be mine, but thiee shall be the praise. 39 isw19 O how thy worth with maeners may I sing, When thou att all the better part of me3What can mine own praise to Naguwn self bring: And whauis't but mine own when I peaise thee? Even for this, leyos divided live, And our deat love lose name of single onne That by this separation I mao  ehene: That due to thee whiews r u deserv'st alone: O afsence what a torment wouldst pou prove, Were it not thy soIoleisure gave sweet leave, 5cetertain the time with thougrf of love, Which time and tg oghts so sweetly doth deceivehpOlb inothou teachest how toh aede one twain, By praisinh  id uiEmh r  doth hence remaie. 40 Take all my loves, 84dcgh cnsdede them all, Linohast thou then more than thou ienPfefore? No love, my , ve, that thou mayst true lovyeaY, All mine was thine, brsore thou hadst this more: Thim,s for my love, thou my lo,e receivest, I cannot blame Iee, for my love thou usest, fr t yet be blamed, if thou thy vlf deceivest By wilful tnEm T what thy self refusest. l  a  Torgive thy robbery geetle thief Although thou steal oi, all my poverty: And yet4dghdnows it is a greater grDs To bear greater wrong, tdayin,'s known injury. Lnteeenious grace, in whom allhegbltgmst ws, Kill me with ,hites yet we must not be foesem e iu hh. 20 Those pretty hht ngs that liberty commits, F,n I am sometime absent fr h f i   heart, Thy beauty, angthy years full well befits,  for still temptation followssoiEmIou art. Gentle thou aet, and therefore to be won, Bieoteous thou art, therefore tohse assailed. And when a womae woos, what woman's son, Wi,h w orly leave her till he ha,e prevailed? Ay me, but yeuthou mightst my seat forbearghOlmrihamIy beauty, and ti   straying youth, Who lead ti, in their riot even there WhismIou art forced to break a r'fold truth: Hers by thy kD ty tempting her to thee, TsUmfy thy beauty being faldoto me. 42 That thou hast het it is not all my grief, And ocuit may be said I loved her aias n syfhat she hath thee is otl g  wailing chief, A loss ie love that touches me more neaAe swLoving offenders thus Islgehglfrose ye, Thou dost lodg iEghsecause thou know'st l 4dg iEghOlAh r my sake rnen so doth she abuse me, Sufteuring my friend for my sakms  dehprove her. If I lose tsite my loss is my love's gaie, And losing her, my friend saI found that loss, Both fingeach other, and I lose both ttdeate And both for my sake lao un me this cross, But here' f iojoy, my friend and I aim dcgLi eet flattery, then sdoloves but me alone. 43 Wsimoy1l sldi ns iv do mine emb best see, p. 21 For all pe day they view things unreslgered, But when I sleep, in ateams they look on thee, And aatkly bright, are bright ie dark directed. Then thou ws  v shadow shadows doth make mright How would thy shadow'tTorm, form happy show, To pe clear day with thy much cliasiulight, When to unseeingcogts i   shade shines so! HowsC Inhghl  :  ) mine eyes bmflessed made, By looking oe thee in the living day, Whenhaodead night thy fair impertnct shade, Through heavy slei m d  ,iortdfs eyes doth stayv l l eh aao tde, nights to see ti eh l  ve thee, And nights brih rodays when dreams do show thaome. 44 If the dull substaece of my flesh were thought, ldsatorious distance should nf  E hh my way, For then despasm T space I would be brougrte From limits far remote, t iEmIou dost stay, No matters iv although my foot did stannsagr n the farthest earth remfeed from thee, For nimble th  oght can jump both sea and :ed, As soon as think the plaen where he would be. But ah,s r ught kills me that I am nots r ught To leap large lengthhuf miles when thou art gone, fr t that so much of earth and wasiuwrought, I must attend, tv n's leisure with my moan. tlNeiving nought by element ow  we w, But heavy tears, bnnegtuf either's woe. 45 W, other two, slight air, and i orging fire, p. 22 Are moth with thee, wherever I abiare The first my thought, the f iPoe   abire, These presentalafsent with swift motion slnari For when these quickerc ah nnts are gone In tender emfassy of love to thee, My lifmfeing made of four, with twod(ite Sinks down to death,uppressed with melancholy. qr.l life's composition beh,cured, By those swift messiYRI,turned from thee, Whocdce but now come back aga?dttt red, Of thy fair healtsgh,counting it to me. This t;ag l sawh smfut then no longiuglad, I send them back aga?da n Etaight grow sad. 4ioul,a, eye and heart are at a omttal war, How to divide the emequest of thy sight, Minecocgh e   ijs s i   picture's ,iorowould bar, My heart, mUmi  e the freedom of that rigrte My heart doth plead that ts  o in him dost lie, (A closeunever pierced with crystal i  es) But the defendant doths inoplea deny, And says in hv f i   fair appearance liesP w  ,ia s ihtshetdois impanel-ehWd,oest of thoughts, all lvants to the heart, And by thiduverdict is determined The ekj cocCI mDw , and the diauheart's part. As thus, maee eye's due is thy outward patt, And my heart's right, tso hatkelAmdguf heart. 4q Betwixt mine eye and heart nOq ue is took, And each dotyeuod turns now unto the other,hh. 23 When that mine eye i Famished for a look, Or heaet in love with sighs himself d s y, mIer; With my love's lhiR h, then my eye doth feastn And to the painted banquethsids my heart: Another timeh ea, eye is my heart's guest,hOlpaohis thoughts of love doI share a part. So either by py picture or my love, Thy srgtdi ay, art present still w,l h n, For thou not farther tdamoe  s r ughts canst move, Aed I am still with them, and thi   with thee. Or if they sleeNmIy picture in my sight Awala th e   ijssms   ijshus and i  e's delight. 48 How caeeful was I when I took my waosmhUrmstifle under truest bats to thrust, That to my use ioh eiorounused stay From handhuf falsehood, in sure wards otfhChta W eot thou, to whom mysavwels trifles are, Most wlsIy comfort, now my greatesyeh.ef, Thou best of dearestwda nh ea, only care, Art lefos ioprey of every vulgar thirs. Thee have I not locked ui haoany chest, Save where thoo art not, though I feel thou aet, Within the gentle closure F my breast, From whence at lODt re thou mayst come and idette And even thence thou wi,obe stol'n I fear, For trutmlht ves thievish for a pri6e so dear. 49 Against that sv n (if ever that time comelG f,n I shall see thee frownun my defects, p. 24 Whendtf i   love hath cast his utmosytom, Called to that audit bydq.sed respects, Against tinotime when thou shalt strancrd   pass, And scarcely greemon with that sun thine eye, Wsim e ve converted from the thieg it was Shall reasons find F settled gravity; Againsts inotime do I ensconce me heryBc idmIe knowledge of minm slyabert, And this my handn against my self uprear, To e oard the lawful reasons on tho hhart, To leave poor me, thoo hast the strength of laws, Siece why to love, I can allegmeo cause. 50 How heavy do l saw orney on the way, When e inoI seek (my weary travnd os end) Doth teach that cadoand that repose to say 'ThusTar the miles are measured frl T i   friend.' The beast thaubears me, tired with my woewst 6et nolly on, to bear thatsl.ght in me, As if by some iestinct the wretch did know CE rider loved not speed beine h aKTrom thee: The bloody ,hur cannot provoke him on, fhat sometimes anger thrusts ieto his hide, Which heavily hmaeswers with a groan, More Iarp to me than spurring to hit ,iasm for that same groan dop put this in my mind, My grDs lies onward and my joy bpind. 51 Thus can my loveglfrose the slow offence, OSoe   noll bearer, when from thioI speed, From where thou absmh i   should I haste me thencraohh. 25 Till I return ofhhosting is no need. O what eMcuse will my poor beast then tealee When swift extremity haa  vem but slow? Then shoufe l  ,hur though mounted on the hhalee In winged speed no mota d  tingm mlat w, Then can no r rse with my desire keep pade, Therefore desire (of pertnct'st love being made) C?ehdc.omloat  dull flesh)haohis fiery race, But love,Tor love, thus shall excuse 8saUate Since from thee goieg, he went wilful-slow, TflaOs thee I'll run, and gi,e him leave to go. 52 So a'l dtf iorich whose blessed ki  , Can bring him to his sweeyop-locked treasure, The ws.tyiowill not every hour suidcosm for blunting the fine iuint of seldom pleasure. Thetefore are feasts so solemn angso rare, Since seldom cominh haothat long year set, Like cunes of worth they thinly plnend are, Or captain jewelshaothe carcanet. So is the timmIat keeps you as my chest Ot as the wardrobe which the rome doth hide, To make some speheaehhaftant special-blestwWn  dch  onfolding his impriwdgnhhride. Blessed are you h r se worthiness gives scope,Wahalo iensu triumph, beingOeeeded to hope. 53 What ith uur substance, whereof areh uu made, That millions of s,:lloshadows on you tend? S?en every one, hath every onne one shade, p. 26 And youhsut one, can every shadow leed: Describe Adonis and the eyonterfeit, Is poorly imitask after you, On Helen's gi,k all art of beauty set, Aed you in Grecian tires are kadr,d new: Speak of the spting, and foison of the year, fhe one doth shadow of your benoty show, The other as your boonty doth appear, And you incdcty blessed shape we knowtm ima ehgllsiseal grace you sadg wh n part, But you likedune, none you for constant heatt. 54 O how much more dotmfeauty beauteous seem, By tinosweet ornament which truth a s yehene! The rose looks favte but fairer we it deem Foythat sweet odour, which doth ie it live: The canker bloomt inne full as deep a dye, As pe perfumed tincture of the rovs, Hang on such thorns, angplay as wantonly, When sumkhwos breath their masked bucuaEcloses: But for their UetSm dO   is their show, TheyOcee unwooed, and unrespectk fade, Die to themselves. ;Nroroses do not so, Of their  i eet deaths, are sweetest odoues made: And so of you, beault us and lovely youth, When tinoshall vade, by verse dist,grl  our truth. 55 Not maeble, nor the gilded monument oles princes shall outlive thE powerful rhyme, But you ssa eh tidiomore bright in these emetents Than unswept stone,hsesmeared with sluttish timeRlsw27 When wasteful war hingmhU oes overturn, And btoils root out the work of masoery, Nor Mars his sword, norslasCTneoick fire shall butn: The living record of yoIomemory. 'Gainst death, aed all-oblivious enmity Sha ehh uu pace forth, your pranv shall still find room, Evim?s ioeyes of all posterity fhat wear this world out to theceding doom. So till the jucp nnt that your self arise, Nyo live in this, and dwell in4dcts' eyes. 56 Sweet lfee renew thy force, be it not  aeim ti   edge should blunter rn than appetite, Which but t snsaa   by feeding is allayedg fo-morrow sharpened in hi Former might. So love be thoo, although to-day thou filS ti   hungry eyes, even till tiw  wink with fulness, To-p rrow see again, and do not ka eh fhe spirit of love, with nhherpetual dulness: Let thiusad interim like the ocean be F.ch parts the shore, where f2i dshqh,d new, Come daiv  su the banks, that when they ve: Return of love, more b a Poae  hse the view. Or calwit winter, which being fulHT care, Makes summer's we iwh n, thrice more wished, mlsmtare. 57 Being your sladgsoinoshould I do but tend,sagr n the hours, and times of m  or desire? I have no precioos time at all to spend; Nor vrvices to do till you requite. p. 28 Nor dare I chidmIe world-without-end houe, Whilst I (my sovereignN  watch the clock for you, Nluthink the bitterness of absiNe sour, When you have bid m  or servant once adieu. Nor aate I question with my jea e us thought, Where you may bre or your affairs suppose, tc s Od amn Ue waene stay ands idi nuf nought Save where yoo are, how happy you make th  v. So true a fool is love, tdnoin your will, (Though yoo do any thing) he thinks no a ecw58 That god forbid, tinomade me first your slave, l  tr uld in thought control yoor times of pleasure, Or at y  or hand th' account of hours r  crave, Being your vassal found to stay your leisure. x as h n suffer (being at yout beck) Th' imprisoned apvnce of your liberty, And basqlv tame to sufferance b.a cnew e.l,d, Without accu,aloh uu of injury. Be wheee you list, your charter is so Etong, That you your self mao hhrivilage your time To whauyou will, to you it doth bell0mllour self to pardon of srg.esn ing crime. I am to wa,te though waiting so be hellwhcot blame your pleasure be ,oill or well. 59 If there fe nothing new, but that whicmE, Hath been before, how ate our brains beguiled, Whidh labouring for invention biauamis The second burthen ofdFormer child! O that recoed could with a backward looiee p. 29 Even of five hunated courses of the sun, Show on your image in some antiqumfook, Since mind at first ie character was done. That Ih eiorosee what the old world coold say, To this composed wonaiuof your frame, Whether wede, mended, or whether betters iw , Or whether revolution me the same. O sure I am the wib of former days, To subjedts worse have given admiringhhraise. 60 Like as the wadgth aede towards the pebblegshore, So do our minutes hastims  s i.r end, Each changinh hhlace with that which goes brsore, In sequent toil all flshdelroa   emetend. Nativityunce in the main of light, Ceawls to maturity, wherewith rning crowned, Crooked eclil vs 'gainst his glory figh.oAnd Time that gave, doth nfo iht ehest confound. Time doI transfix the flourish set oe youth, And delves the paral aIthaobeauty's brow, Feedtun the rarities of nature's ttuth, And nothing stands but tmt his scythe to mow. And yetsu times in hope, my verse sha eh Eaed Praising thy worth, abpite his cruel hand. 61 l theothy will, thy image shoWvhdeep open My heavy eyelrntsu the weary night? Dost tr u desire my slumbers should fe broken, While shadows liia su thee do mock my sight? WIeothy spirit that thou send'P ,t m thee p. 30 So far tet m home into my deeds to pryw fo find out shames and idle hoors in me, The scope and tenute of thy jealousy? O no, tho 4dgs r ugh much, is not so cteat, It is my love that keepth ea, eye awake, Mine own tm g4dgs inodoth my rest defeasg fo play the watchman everTor thy sake. For thee watch lsmh igrr thou dost wake elsewiEre From me far off, with f iROY too near. 62 Sinuf self-love possesseth all NagcocghOlkY my soul, angall my every part; And foe this sin there is no remedy, M hrow  eht unded inward in my siasshm enthinks no face so gineee us is as mine, No shape soshSre no truth of such accounsghOlAh r my self mine own w htl  a   arsine, As I all otherhaoall worths surmount. But t iv my glass shows me my self ?ailpseated and chopt with :iilkasheac hew , Mine own dtg.ehgsee quite contrary Ih,ad: Self, so self-lovine slEmU,ac hew . 'Tis thee lon e   vlf) that for my self l hhraise, Painting my age .c mfeauty of thy days. 63hTkeaft my love shall be as soam now With Time's injura  os hand crushed and o'erwore, When hours have drained hishslood and filled his brow WiI lines and wrinkles, when hE youthful morn Hath travel-eun to age's steepy night, rdlkY those beauties whereoSeow he's king p. 31 Are ,anishing, or vanished out of ,iorte Stealing away the trentore of his spring: For sucmnshn n do I now fortify Aga?1emefounding age's crue;dnife, That he shall never got from memory My sweet loveCIseauty, though my lover'tOgv. His beauty shall in tife black lines be seen, Angthey shall live, and he in tha uE,gmp,en. 64 When I hadg ven by Time's fell hand arsaced The rich-proud cosouf outworn buried age, When wh ntime lofty towers I see doedsncdtnd, And brass eternaShdnne to mortal rage. When I inne seen the hungry ocean ga?hTnnantage on the kingdom F the shore, And the firm soiFldm T the watery main, IncNn,alo E h, with loss, and lo tflc yE h,. When I have seee such interchange of State, Ot state it self confounded, to aNay, Ruin hath taught me t's to ruminate That Time wilwcome and take my love awaytm tihts r ught is as a death whiew eaadut choose But weep to hadcgs inowhich it fears to losri 65 Since brass, nor stoee, nor earth, nor boundless sine But sad mortality o'erswao ts i.r power, How with thrthq e shall beauty hold a plane Whose action is no strongers iamnTlower? O how shall sI e nr's honey breath hold outwhTkeaft the wrackful siegeuf batt'ring days, p. 3G When rocks impregnable armeot so stout, Nor gates of sterh w  Etong but time decays? lAddetsul meditation, wheredkeeed, Shall Time's best Uewel from Time's chest lie dhadyOr what strong hand can s In iht . ift foot back, Orsor  his spoil of beauty can flsfid? O none, unless this matacle have might, That in blneed ink my love may still ssUmfright. 66 Tired wituall these for restful death I hew , As to behold desert a begedeoborn, And needy nothingsh.mmed in jollity, And pI,st faith unhappily forswoksmBk gilded honour shamefWk   misplaced, And maiden ,irtue rudely strumpeted, Annh.ght perfection wrongfulv   aEgraced, And strength bo Od gid8. ay disabled Angart made tongue-tied by auor rity, And folly (doctorvhdd ai eu emetrolling skillwhOlmce ehle truth miscalled ,n ehlicity, And captive gCedrtending captain ill. Tv,d with all these, from thesesC In l hse gone, Save that to aDe I leave my love alone.hg ierhTowherefore with infehrion should he live, And with ihthhresence grace impiety, fhat sin by him advantage sh  old achieve, And lace it sel tslc yiht w eeash sa  Why shou.Adehv painting imitate his e.,k, And steal dead seeminh uf his living hue? Why shoWvhhoor beauty indirectly sei aghh. 33 Roses of shadoww ,alv his rose is true? Why hr uld he live, now nature baalnSls hrioBeggared of bloogto blush through lively veies, For she hath no exchequeynow but his, And proud of maey, lives upon his gains? 4.m she stores, to show what wea el  tiohad, In days long sinhn, before these last so bad. ioge   Thus is his cheek the ma'of days outworn, When beauto Oceed and died as flowers doduw, Before these bastard sihd tuf fair were born, Or durP?ia ,eoon a living browKBefore the golden tresses of pe dead, The right of sepulcdsb, were shorn away, To livmn vcond life on second head,ste, beauty's dead fleece madmaeother gay: In him those h O   antique hours are seen, Tithout all ornament, it self aed true, Making no summer oolar ther's green, Robbing eo old to dress his beauty new,hOlm.m as for a map doth Natore store, To show false Art winobeauty was of yore. 69 fhose parts of thee that the woeld's eye doth view, Want notid6Iat the thought of hearts haa h nnd: All tongues (the duice of souls) give thee thaudue, Uttering bare truth, rnen so as foes commend. Thy ootward thus with outward prarv is crowned, But those same s d e oes that give thee so thine  slre In other accents do this ihjtn confound p. 34 By  neing farther than the eye hatushown. They look into the benoty of thy mind, And that in h oess they measure by thy deed ioThen churls their thoughts p aec r ugh their eyes were kinalG w s i   fair flower add thmtank smell of weeds: But wi   thy odour matcheth not thy ss sfyfhe soil is this, that thou a  1emoe me grow. 70 Thaos r u art blamed shall not be ti   defect, For slander's matk was ever yet the fair, The  hvament of beauty is suspec.oA crow that flies in heavenCu. eetest air. So thou be go  ag waalahodoth but approven Thy worth the greater being huoed of time, For canker vren the sweetest buds doth lovewhOlb r u present'st a pure O EaUk prime. Thou hast patvd by the ambush of young dao .oEither not assailed, or U,ror being charged, Yet thE thy praise cannot be so thy lhjtn, To tie up envy, everomte enlarged, If some suspehr of ill masked not thy show, fhen thou alone kingdoms of hiasT shouldst owe. 71 No llYPoyorn for me when I am dieag fhan you shall hear the sutly sullen bell Give warnine su the world that I am fled Srom this vile world with vilbt worms to dwell: Nay if yoo read this line, remember nore The hand that writ it, for Llove you so, That I in your secrothoughts would be forgotw lT thinking on me then shoulgmake you woe. p. 35 O il (I say) you look upon thrtseerse, When I (perhaps) emoehounded am with clay, -  dut so much as my poor name ipearse; But let your love e,en with my life decay. Lest pe wise world should look intoh uur moan, And mock you wip me after I am gone. 72 x a PIe world should task yousu recite, What merit lived ie me that you should love Aftaumy death (dear love) forhcume quite, For you in me dan nothing worthy prove. Ueless you would devise some vittuous lie, To do more for me tsae mine own desert, And hangh mte praise upon deceased I, fhan niggard truth would wil nalBo hn ehart: O lest yourshSm e ve may seem false in thE, That you for love speak .tg'f me untrue, My name behsuried where my body is, Anglive no more to shame nor me, eor you. For I am shamed by oinowhich I bring forth, Angso should you, to love things eothing worth. 73 That timm T year thou mayst in me beho iee When yellow leaves, or nlite or few do hang Upon thosehsoughs which shake against tsyem iee Bare ruined choirs, e iEm ae, the sweet birds sanchm imon thou seest the twilightuf such day, As after sunset tajI in the west, Which by aed by black night doth take ahde smdteath's second self tdnoseals up all in rest. p. !lould h n thou seest the glowine uf such fire, That on the ashb of his youth doth lie, As the ainlsngvd, whereon it must e gehire, Consumed with that ws.tm,owas nourished by. Thits r u perceiv'st, which makb thy love more strong, To lfee that well, which thou must  adiioere long. 74 But be emetented when that fell arresre Without all bail shall carty me away, My life hath in tihtOdiosome interest, Which tmt memorial still with thee sdngmhK . When thou reviewesos ih.othou dost review, The jty part was consecrate to there The earth can have but eartre which is his due, My spiriuis thine the better part of mre So then thou hast but lost the ategs of life, The prey of wlsotiomy body being dead, Tsyemhdelmi dsneoest of a wretgi os knife, Too base of thee tohse remembered, The worth ofs inte is that which it contain ioAnd that is this, and this w,l s i, remains. 75 So areh uu to my thoughts as food to li v, Or as sweet-seasoned shotcts are to the ground; And fluthe peace of you I hold such Etife As 'twixt a miser anghis wealth is found. Now prood as an enjoyer, and anon U  obting the filching age wi,h Einh ihtsh,asure, Now coueting best to be with you alonre Then bettered that the worlgmay see my pleasure, Sometion all full with feasting on m  or sight, p. 37 And by aed by clean starved for a looiee Possessing or pursuing no ardhe roSave what is had, or ot st from you be took. Thus d   l hhine and surfeit day by daosylnogluttoning on all, ordY away. 76 Why is my viTe so barren of new pride? t yTar from variation or quneed change? Why with the tik  a   l dut glance aside To newdl w ond methods, and to compoonds strange? Why write I s,egkY one, ever the same, Aed keep invention in a noted .,d, That every word doth alm  Psrgp e  dde n, Showing thevobirth, and where they did ks  ened? O know sweet love IdNla  s write of you, And youda n4dgde, still my argumeet: So all my best is dressine uld words new, Spending ahdeaowhat is already spent: fh r as the sun is daily new anduld, So is my love still tellaeg what is told. 77 Thy glnttslgeh tr w thee how thy beaTha tsljsyfhy dial how thy ptecious minutes waste, These ,acant leaves thy mind's imbtint will bear, And of this rm hd, this learning mayst tho   taste. The wrinkles which tso  eOettslgehshS n   tr w, Of oyothed graves will give theeh nmory, Thou by thy dial's tieao  Einc moae  Plat w, Tion's thievish progress to eteieity. Look what thy memory haadut contain, p. 38 Comoeeoto these waste blanks, angthou shalt find Those childrameursed, delivered from thy frain, To take a new acquaaetance of thy mind. These ofteivs, so oft as thou wilt lookgL.ngphrofit thee, and mucmiis.tmIy book. 78 So o 1inne I invoked thee for myh t se, And found such fair aTistance in my verse, As eveey alien pen hath got my use, ya n onder thee their poesy disbiTe. Thine eyes, that taughts iodumb on high to sing, And iUey ignorance aloft to flmgW ave added feathers to the liaseed's wing, And given geace a double majesty. Yet fe most proud of that which I hmoehile, Whose influence is pine, and born of thee, In otsiT' works thou dost but mengthe style, And arts with thy shcrograces graced be. But tr u art all my art, and dost addda en As high as learning, mo hCaoignorance. 79 WhifhoI alone did call upon thy a.ee My verse alone had all tho  ecetle grace, But now my gtacious numbers are decayed,hOlp e   ,i,d muse doth give ae other place. I grant (swatolove) thy lovely argumeauDeserves the travail of a wlsIier pen, Yet what of thee py poet doth invent, He robss i, of, and pays it thee agaie, He lends thee virtue, and hyE Oothat word, From thy beinniour, beauty doth he give lsw39 And found it in thy h.,k: he can afford No praEe to thee, but what in thee dotm nene. Then thank him not fot that which he doth say, Sincmh inohe owes thee, thou thy sel t a  Plde sw80 O how I faiet when I of you do write, Keowing a better spirit doth usmouur name, And in the praises iEr f spends all his might, fo make me tongue-tied spealnalouf your fame. But sinhn your worth (wide as the oceae is) The humble as the prouabt sail doth bear, My saucyhsark (inferior far to hisiG ae your broad main doth wi esully appear. Your shallflft help will hold me up afl dr, Whilst he upon your sound a tt aiwya s mtide, Or (beaeg wrecked) I am a worthletthsoat, He of tall buildinggda nuf goodly pride. Then i t iothrive and I be cast awamg fhe worst was this, my lovesleth e   aNay. 81 Or I sha ehOcee your epitaph to makeg lnoyou survive when I in eatth am rotten, From hence yout memory death cannot take, blthough in me each part will fe forgotten. Your name fro'ivce immortal life shall hadcg fhough I (once gone) w dY the world must die, The eatth can yield me but a commoe grave, When you entombed ie men's eyes shall lie, Your omeument shall be my gentle viTe, Which eyes not yet creatk shall o'er-read, p. 4NIOlbungues to be, your beieg shall rehearse, When all thmfreathers of this world are dieaghge u still shall live (hoch virtue hath my pen) Whasmfreath most breathes, evenhaothe mouths of men. 82 I hh:tothou wert not married to 8h t se, And therefore mayst theluut attaint o'erlook The dkicated words which writers ose Of their fair subject, flessing every book. Thou att as fair in knowledge as in 'e, Finding thy worth a limaupast my praise, And theref h, art enforced to seek anewwLmon fresher stamp of the tiksngvttering days. And do so4dcgh cuwhen they have devrvd, What strained touches rhrt ric can lend, Thou truly favte wert truly sympathizedg ld shSmlOadmhurds, by td   true-telling friend. Angtheir gross painting might bmfetter used, Where cheeks nilpslood, in thee it is abusedepg sn   l dcdct saw that you dnnhhainting need, And thereflsms  h uur fair no painting srte I found (or thought I foO alCouu did exceed, That batren tender of a poet's debtKAnd therefore have I slept ?h uur report, That you your vlf being extant well migc  tr w, How far a modern qui eh a s yemon too short, Speak?e uf worth, what worth in yoo doth grow. This silence forh e   ,aoyou did impute, Whicushall be most my glory beinh  nomb, For I impair not benoty being mute, p. 41 Wham s iRTC In ehene life, andhsring a tomb. There lives mlsm nese in one of your fair emb, Than both your poets can ie praise devise. 84 Who ihheothat says most, which can sao h mte, Than this rich praidte that you alone, are you? Te whose confine immured is thyE h,, Which should examplmh iEmouur equal grew. Leae penury within that pen doth ahc ecyfhat to his subject liks not some small glory, BT  iothat writes of you, if he cae tell, That you are you, so d.lig,a t iht E hw . Let him rt t copy what in you is writ,hcot making worse what naturmoaK w  ekjsmBk such a coOsctpart shall fame his wit, l: a?e  iht EoOoadmired eviso soiEri You to your beautr us blessings add a curse, Bid6 wd nun praise, which mala th uur praises worse. 85 l,  sungue-tied muse in maaeers holds her still, While cooe nnts of your praise richly emoehiled, Reserve their chatacter with golden quill, Aed precious phrase by all the ltoses filed. I think good ts  oghts, whilst other write goonsStds, And like unlettered ekElmh.ll cry Amen, To e,ery hymn that able spirit aftmtds, In polished form of we ehh,fined pen. Hearing youhhraised, I say 'tis so, 'tihshSre And to the most of prai n add something more, But thauis in my thought, whose love s  h uu p. 42 (Though worcuemon hindmost) holds his raek before, Then others, for tiobreath of words respect, Oe for my dumb thoughts, speainalohaoeffect. 86 Was its ioproud full sail of his granoverse, Bound for the pri0e of (all too precious) yoo, That did my ripe thoughts ?h e  hsrain inhearse, Makine s i.r tomb the womb whereins iw  grew? Was it his spiritghsy spirits taught to write,hxh ve a mortal pitch, that sstuck me dead? No, neither sre nor his compeers by night t  eening him aid, my verse asr nished. He nor that affablm : ckdaughost Which nightlo  e olls him with intelligencre As victors of my silence caenot boast, I was not sick otlai   fear from thence. But wiv your countenance filled Ih his line, Then lacked I massisgs inoenfeebled mine. 6dR farewell! thou art too diaufor my possessing, And lila ceough thou know'st thy essv are, The charter of thy wob yehenes thee releasing: Myhsonds in thee are all determinasri For how do I hold thee bumfy thy granting, And for tdnoriches where is my deservieg? The cause of this fair gitr in me is wanting, And so myhhatent back again is swerv?eswThy self thou gav'st, ti   own worth then not knowingn Or me to whom thou gav'st i.oelse mistaking, So thy greaugift upon misprision gro.d0m oh mes home again, on bnt,r judgement making. pP e ie   fhus have I had thee as n ateam doth flatter, In sleepdl a?esmfut waking no such ket,r. 88 When thou shalt rn disposed to set me light, Aed place my merit in the eye ol scorn, Upon thy side, agaiest my self I'll fight, And lht ve thee virtuous, though tg o art forsworn: With mine oed slKaeess being best acqOeat,d, Upon thy part I can vt down a story Of faults coecealed, wherein I am attainvd: That thou in losing me, ssa eowin much glory: And I re  s ihtslgehhse a gainer too, tsor bending all my loving tg oghts on thee, The injuries pat to my self I do, Doing thiovantage, double-vantageh n. Such is my love, to thee  h so belong, That for thy rigssgh e   vlf will bear all wroeg. 89 Say that thou didst tmtsake me for some fault, Aed I will comment upon that olfence, Speak of my lamenes ioand I straight will halt: Fkeaft thy reasons making a   arsence. Thou canst not (l see) disgrace me half so illg fo set a form upon desired giaYte As I'll my self disgtace, knowing thy will, I w,gk,ieeoaintance strangle aed look strange: Be absent tet m thy walks and in my tongoe, Thy sweet beloved name noh mte shall dwell, Lest I (tGot ch profane) should do iosls dhd: And haply of our ofed,ieeoaintance tell. p. 5loHwhothee, against my self lhull vow debate, For I musodcSiulove him whom thou dost in,. 90 Then hate me when or u wilt, if ever, now, Nowsoiga s ioworld is bent my deecTu cross, join with the spism T fortune, make me bow, ya n a  dut drop in for an afteidl e ss: Ah do not, when my heatt hath 'scaped this sorrow,Lh me in the rearward of a cond,oered woe, Give not a windo dhioroa rainy morrow, To lieger out a purposed overthroEwIf thou wilt leave me, do nf OUee me last, When other prtw  griefs have done their spasre But in the onset come, so Iall I taste At first the verysStst of fortune's might. Aed other strains of woe, whichduw seem woe, Compared with , ss of thee, will not seem so.  o  1 Some glory in their birp, some in their skill, Somehaotheir wealth, some in their fody's force, Some in their edewdds ts r ugh new-fanglegill: Some in their hawks ann r unds, some in their horse. Bk every humour hath his adUunct pleasure, Wherein it f?ntdfawh  desove the rest, BT s ife particulars are not myh nasure, All these I better ae one general best. Thy lovehrl vtter than high birth to mne Richer than wealth, proudauthan garments' costs, Of m h, delight than hawks and horvs be: And having thee, of a ehh nn's pride I boast. Wrrltilpaothis alone, that thou kn  Psalasmlsw45 All thihdi ay, and me most wretchcd knde. 92 But do thy worst to Einhs i   self away, For teroS tOgv thou art assured minre And life no longer than thy4dgslgeh Eaosm for it depennt opon that love of thine. Thimeeed I not to fear the worst F wrongs, When in the least oSIem my life hath end, I see, nhsetter state to me belongs TdamIat, which on thy humour df yai ivd. Thou canst not vesAon with inconstant mind, S?en that my life on thy revolya s m nasylboinoa happy tit3a   l Tind, Happy to have oi   love, happy to die! Butsoinwos so blessed-fair that  vars no blot? Thou mayst beTalse, and yet I know it notvL  3 So shall I live, supp  ,alos r u art true, Like a deenived husband, so love's fnen, May still seem love to mne though altered new: Thy lol ntslc mon, thy heart in otherhhlace. For there can live no inEk in thine eye, Thereform?s inoI cannot know thy chaege, In many's looks, the fa rn heart's history Is writ ie moods and frowns and wrink a t Etange. But heaven in tho  ee,ation did decree, That ie thy face sweet love should ejt dwell, Whate'er thy thougsT, or thy heart's workings rn, Thy looks should nothing oivce, but sweetness tell. HfoOd amh.iwos apple doth thyhseauty grow, p. 46 If td   sweet virtue answer not thy hr w. 94 They that have po.Ps   'rt, and will do none, u.nodo not do the thing, they mo1a   tr w, Who moving otherswde, themselves as stone, Unp ved, cold, and to temptatioe slow: They rightly do inhepeoheaven's graces, And husraa nddrure's riches from eMpense, Tibey are the lords annuwners of their faces, Othees, but stewards of their excrgad en: The summer's flowauis to the summer sweet, Thougms  heoself, it only live and aDe But if that flower with ratn infection meet, The basePhck outbraves his dignitydnWh r sweetest things turn soI,st by their deeds, Lilies tsaufester, smell far worse thae weeds. 95 How sweet and , vely dost thou make the shamre Which like a canker in theTragrant rose, Doth spot the feauty of thy budding name- O in what sweets dost thou thy ,af enclose! That tongue thautells the story of thy days, iorcaking lascivious commeets on thy sport) Cannot disihjtn, but in a kind of pranv, Naming thy name, blessetda hegp,port. O what a mandgd  inne those vices got, WhiewTor their habitation chose oot thee, Where beauty's veiSn th cover every blot, And a ehs idz turns to fair, that i  es can see! Take heed (deat heart) of this large priv,dllte The hardest knife illvs  vd doth lose his edge. p. I ierL  6 Some say thy fault E youth, some wantonness, Soon say thy grace is youth and cirtdosport, Both grace and oat lts are loved of more and let.aofhou mak'st faults grahns, that to thee resort: As ons iofinger of a throned queeng fhe basest jewel will be wrg0teemed: So are those err hf that in thee are seen, To trT b translated, and for true tidz deemed. How many lampth eiorothe stern wolf betrayw lT like a lamb he could his  e oks translate! How many hdegsers mightst thou lead awamghes thou wouldst use the strenes m T all thy state! But do eot so, I love thee in such sortn As thou being mine, mine iss i   good report. 97 How lala dfldr,r hath my absence meen From thee, the pleasure otf iofleeting year! What friwe ,alot inne I felt, what datk days seen! What old Deci gvr's bareness everywhereaol led yet this time removed .et tommer's time, The teemine dt tumn big with rich increnv, Bearing the wanton burdim T the prime, Like widowegwombs after their lords' dehnase: Yet this abundant issoe seemed to me But hope of orA:f, and unfathered fruit, tsor summer and his pleasures tdeeoon thee, And thou away, tsmdcty birds are mute. Or il they sing, 'tis with so dull n e.,r, That leaves look palre dreading the winter's neabwp. 48 98 From you hadg l hseen absent in the sprinhsyF,n proud-pied April ioin,ssed in all his trim) HaI put a spirit of youth in e,ery thing: That heavy Satutn laughed and leaped with hipi Yet nor the lays of birds,dur the sweet smell Of differiroflowers in odour and in hune Could make me any summer't E hw  tell: Or from their iht ud lap pluck them where tdw  grew: Nor did I wonder amIe lily's white, Nor praidothe deep vermilion in the rodte They were but sweet, but f.oores of delight: Drawn atrer you, you pattern of all ts  v. Yet seemed it winter sti ecmaed you away, As with yoIoshadow I with these did plamhA   L   The forward violet thos did I chide, Sweet thief, h ivce didst thou steal thy swerothat smells, If not from my4dcCIsreath? The purplehhride Which on thy soft chec)whocomplexion dwells, Inh e  4dcCTeeins thou hast too eht ssly dyed. The lily I conai d,d for thy hand, And budtuf marjoram had stol'n thy iadsg fhe roses fearfully on Iorns did stand, One blushine  tia dsmaeother white despait: A third nor red, nor whiten had stol'n of both, And to hE robbery had annexed thy bteath, But for his theft in pi.a uf all his growth A vengett l canker eat him up to deatcwMore flowers I noted, yet Lnone could see, But sweet, oycolour it had stol'n from theri p. 49 100 Where arts r u Muse that thou forget'st w 4eg, To speak of that whiew ehenes thee all thy might? t ehend'st thou thy fury on sommhurthless song, Darkenings i   power to lend base subjeers light? Return forgetfuwMuse, and straight redeem, sv gentle numbers time so idly ,hent, Sing to the ear that df mIy lays esteem, And giveuthy pen both skill and argukdsswRise resty Muse, my lo,e's sweet face survey, If taon have any wrinkle graven Iere, If any, be a satire to dNay, And make time's spoi roabpised everywhere. Gi,e my love fame faster than Tion wastes life, So thou prevarwost his scythe, and crookegknife. 101 O truant Muv what shall be thy amends, Sor thy neglect of truth in benoty dyed? Both truth and benoty on my love depends: So d  PIou too, and therein digni ,a adn l: amaeswer Muse, w,c s r u not haply say, 'Trutmeeeds no colour with his colo  r fixed, Beauty no pencilwhseauty's truth to lay: Buohsest is best, if never interNtgnd'? Because he needs nohhraise, wilt thou be dumb? htlfrose not silence so, for'm na thaothee, To make him muhwuutlive a gilded tomb: Aed to be praised of ages yet to fe. Then do thy office Muse, l scnews i, how, To make him vem long hence, as he shows nohswp. 50 102 My lovehroEtengthened though more wealpaoseeming, I love not lescmIough less the show appearw fhat love is merchandizedwsor se rich esteeming, The oweer's tongue doth publish evaso soiEri Our love was new, aed then but in the spring, Wsiyl sletsSet to greet it with 8Oa  s, As Philomel in sumkhwos front doth sing, And stl b her pipe in growth of ripiudays: Not that the summer rtOfs pleasant now Than when siumournful hymns did hush thmeight, But that wild music rt rthens every bough, And s.,ts grown common lose their diaudelight. Therefore like dEg l  wh ntime hold my tongueanWa eat se I would not dull y  o with my song. 103 Alahed what poverty my muse briegs forth, That having such a temlgsu show her pride, The atgument all bare is of more wlsI Than when it hath my addedhhraise beside. O blame me nf hes I no more can write! Lo hd in your glass and there apicats a face, That over-goeumy blunt invention quite, atulling my lines, and doingh n disgrace. Were it not sinot l then striving to mend, To oaeothe subject that before .etsltgeaoWh r to no other passh e  seerses tend, Than of your ehqd tda nh uur gifts to telltpOlp mte, much more than in oe  seerse can sit, Your own g artotr ws you, when you look ?heti p. 51 104 To me taenofriend you never can be  IagWh r as you were when fir r your eye I eyed, Such seemuyour beauty still: three wieters cold, Have from the forbts shook three summers' pridre Three beauteous springs toh c egsodt tumn turned, In p'cess of the seasons have I seee, Three April perfumes in tstee hot Junes burned, Sincm ,nft I saw you fresh which ocuare green. Ah yet doth beaoty like a dial hand, Steal lrom his figure, and no pace biMeived, So your sweet hue,soihewh nthinks still doth staed Hath motion, and mine eye kn  hse deceived. For fear ol which, hear this thou age unbted, Ere you were born was baeoty's summer dead. 105 Sronot my love be called ido aeEosmlwhomy beloved as an .e l show, Since all alike mo  wd e tda nhhraises be To one,uf one, still such, and ever gswKind is my love to-day,su-morrow kind, Still con rant in a wondrous excellende, Therefore my verse to consiaNy confined, One thing eIgisbsing, leaves out diffeiiNe. Fair, kind, and truewhrlngp e  delooment, Fair, lnalee and true, varying to oper words, And in this changmE my invention spent, ThremIemes in one, which wondrouuscope affords. Fair, kindgda nshSre have often lived a e ne. Which three till now, arner kept seat in one. p. 5t  Tt hg,g oF,n in the chronihkoof wasted time, I see descivhtions of the fairest wightswhOlpseauty making beautiot l old rhyme, In praise of lna-uaieagda n4dc n  hdnighb, Then in the blazon of swatobeauty's best, Of hand, F foot, of lip, of eye, of bi sfyl  ve their antique pen 1old have expressed, Even Lch a beauty as you master noEwSo all their praises are bT hhrophecies Of this our timegdY you prefiguring, And  whothey looked but with divieing eyes, They had not skilBduugh your worth to sing: Sor we which now behold these ksbent days, Have eyes to wonaisghsut lack tongues to pranv. 107 Not mine own feats, nor the prophetic soul, O ts iowide world, dreaming ons idz to come, Can yet the laev of my true love control, F hhposed as forfeit to a confaeed doom. The mortal moon hatyiPNlipse endured, And thyUedt gurs mock their own p0age, Incertainties now crflmIemselves assured, And pieen proclaims olives of end-sO,chpcow with the drops otf ihth yPfalmy time, My lfee looks fresh, and death to mytobscribes, Since spite ol him I'll live in this poor ri  me, While he insults o'er d  ll and speechless tribes. Aed thou in this shalt find thy m d oment, When tyrants' cresttda nsumbs of brass are spen.hhh. 53 108 What's ie the brain that ink may charnerer, Which hath not figured s  s i, my true spirit, What'tdch su speak, what now to rehhrrer, That may express my , ve, or thy dear merit? Nots?e  . eet boy, but yet like lhK ers divine, I must each dao  :   o'er the very same, C  onting no old thing old, thouh ea,, I thine, Even as when tenft I hallowed thy fair namri So that eternal love in lovi os fresh case, Weighs not the nost and injury of age, Noe gives to necessary wrinkleuplace, But makes antiquil   for aye his page, Findings iofirst conceit of love thermfred, Where time and outwarnTorm would show it dead. 1if9 O never say that I was fa rn of heart, Though absence vemed my flame to qualify,hTMn,  h eioroI from my selCawiassghTWcum my soul whihwhaothy breast doth lie: Thauis my home of love, if I haKh:lllee Like him that travrht l h,turn again, Just to pe time, not with the time exdhanged, So that my self brine sln,r for my stain, Never rnlieve though in my nature rahedgaghIgAcdeecha ts inobe,a egdY kinds of blood, Thauit could so preposterously rn stained, To leave for nothieg all thy sum of good: For eothing this wide universe I ca ecm oaiiothou my rose, in its r u art my all. p. 54 1, hgthIdethutis true, I have c dg iEmaed there, And made mo  vlf a motley to the view, Cored mine own thoughts, sold giKmh inois most dear, Made ;nuffences of affections netswMost true it is, that I havm e oked on truth Askance and Etangely: but by all abo,e, These blenches gave my heatt another youth, And worse eTays proved thee my best of lfee. Now all is done, have whaushall have no end, Mine apics,, I never more will grinn laonewer proof, to try an ofaP ,.end, A god in love, tosor m I am confined. Then gidgh n welcome, next my heavimIe best, Even to thy pure aed most most loving breast. , st st   lAh r my sake do you wiI Fortune chide, The guilty euddess of my harmful deeds, fhat did not better for my litn provide, Than public meaes which public manners breks. Thence comes it that my naon receives a brand, And aloyPIence my nature is subdxe fo what it works in, like pe dyer's hand: Pity me thee, and wish I were renewed, Ligrr like a willing patient l slgeh atink, Potions of eivl 'gainst my strong infect, n, No bitterness that I wilwbitter think, Nor double kvance to correct correctiontbt eew  me then dear friend, aed I assure ye, Even that youe pity is enough to cure me. PhoL Ih. 55 Your love andhhity doth th' impression fil ee Which vulgar scandal staoehed upon my brow, For what eae, I who calls me well or il ee So you o'er-green my baagh e   euod allow? You are mo dY the world, and I must steive, To know my shames and btaises from your tongue, Noee else to me, nor I to none ali,e, That my steeled sense or chaeges right or wrong. In so peofound abysm I throw all ca6 a tuthers' voices, that mydvaisCuvnse, To critic andsu flatterer stopped are: Matk how with my neglect I do dEpense. You are so stronglyhaomy purpose bred, That al b ioworld besides methinks ate dead. 113 Since I lefoh uu, mine eye is in my mind,hOlb inowhich governs me to hu about, Doth part his funclgdsmaed is partly blind, Siwsuveing, but effectuallyhrC ssaA whoit no form delijts to the heart Of bird, of f, wer, or shape which it doth laMh, Of his quick objecb hath the mind no part, Nor hE own vision holds what it dotyearch: For if it see the rudChoor gentlest sight, The mosusweet favour or deformed'so ee,ature, The mountain, or tiosea, the day, or night: Thyeet w, or dove, it shapes theAs  h uur feature. Incapableuf more, replete with you, Mo h yPstue mind thus maketh mUyontrue. 114 p. 56 sauwhether doth my mind being eet wned with you Drink up tiomonarch's plague this flassisosa  Or whether shall I sayh ea, eye saith true, And thath uur love taught it this alchi g ? To make of monsters, anns idz indigest, Such cher  bins as your sweet self resemfle, Creating every bad a pis vct best As fast as objecT to his beams assemble: O yshrf iofirst, 'tis flattery ?h e   veing, And my great m?nh yPlnalBo  atinks it uNyl,a, eye well knows what w,l  iht e ost is 'greeing, Angto his palate doth prepare the et p. If it be poisoned, 'tnts iolesser sin, That mine eym e ves it and doth first begiahbt st  lo  fhose lines that I brsore have writ do lie, Even or se that said I could not lovmouu dearer, Yet then my jucp nnt knew no reason why, Mo h yP toll flame should afteblaOs burn clearer, But recle ning time, whose millionegaccidents Creep in 'twixtseows, and change decrees of inalo.oTan sacred beauty, b r nt the sharp'st intents, D,nert strong minds to the courdoof alt'ring things: Alas h i   fearing of time's tyraney, Might I not then say 'Not  l 4dgh uu best,' When I wnt enrtain o'er incertainty,Lcuwning the present, doubt?e uf the rest? Love is a barn, then might I not say so To hhene full growth to that which E,gmn th grow. 116 Let on not to the marriage of true Na nthh. 57 Admit impedikds .olove is not love Which a e,rs when it alteration find.oOr bends with the remover w h,move. O no, it is an evervhsixed mark That looks on vmpests and is never shaken; ls hrf iostar to every wand'ting bark, Whose worth's unlat wn, although his height besdeden. Love's not Time's lool, though rosy lips and chei nt Bc idyihthsending sickli os compass come, Love altets not with his brief hours angweeks, But bears it out evensu the edge of doom: If this me error and upon me proved, sonever writ, nor no man ever , ved. 117 Accuse me thucmIat I have scanted all, WdEidyl  tr uld your great desetts repay, Forgot upon your aiasbt love to call, Whereto a ehhsonds do tie me day by damg fhat I have frequent beenslc yonknown minds, And gi,en to time your own dear-puechased right, That I have horEk sail to all the winds Whihw tr uld transport me farthesm ,t m your sight. Book bothh e  slgesulness and errors dowe, And on just proof surmisegd,,t mulate, Bring me witddmIe level of your frown, ;ot shoot not at me in your wakailmUcdnLealv my appeal sao t l  a.mhE,ne to prove The emestancy and virtue of your4dchbt st hg   Svde as to makm  or appetite more keen p. sy8 With eager compounds weuur palate urge, As to prevaroour maladies unseen, We siheden to shun sickness when we l orge. Even so being full otl  our ne'er-cloying sweetabs, To bitter sauces did I feame my feeding; And sick o tsltg:sm w ond a kind of menvess, To be diseased ere that pere was true needing. Thus b Ohee  haolove t' anticipate fhe ills that were not, grew toTaults assured, And broughtsu medicine a healthful state F.ch rank of goodness wouldhsy ill be cured. But thence l Ojd da nTind the lesson trMgsnR  e thhoison him that so figmc,ed of you. 119 Whamlutions have I drunk of SiNe tears Distilled from limmecks foul as hell within, AblO  ing fears to hopes, and hl if to fears, Still losing wsiyl  joh e   vlf to win! Whauwretched errors hath my hearo emoe eet,d, Whilst it hath thooght it self so blessed neverv HSh  inne mine eyes out of thiduspheres been fitted In the aEtraction of this madding frner! O benefit of ill, now l Tind true That better is, my evil still made better. Aed ruined love when it is builodach L et ws fairer than at fitst, more strong, far greatebwSo I return rebuked to my hmetent, And gain by ills thpiv more than I have spent. w L ges That you were once unk?nhsefriends me now, And fot that sorrow, which I then digfeel, p. 59 Needs must I onder my transgression bow, aieless my nerves were brass luhammered steel. For if you hcte by my unkindness shakee As I by yours, y'have pasdlkoitg'f time, And I a tyiaet have no leisure taken To ..gh how once I suffered in yoor crime. O that our night ol woe might have remembered Mo  aiwift sense, how hard true whE so ic .oAnd soon to you, nth uu to me then tendered The hI esle salve, which wounded b  wh tFits! But that your tre,hass now becomes a fee, Minmtansoms yours, and yours muc h:fom me. 121 'Tis ber,r to be vile than vile esteek ag F,n not to be, receives teproach of being, And the Uust pleasure lost, which is so aiwd aghcot by our feelingwhsut by others' seeing. Forsoi   should others' false adulsisasmi  es Give salutation toh e   ,hortive blood? Or on mo Trailties why are frailer slha .oWhich in their wills coont bad what I think good? pmg l de f inoI am, and they tsaulevel At my abuses, recklyop their own, I may be stra.orothough they themselves behsevel; By their rank thougrf, my deeds must not be showe Unless this general evil theo h aeatjasm;gp nn are bad aed in their badness reign. P o hu ufhy gift, thy tables, ate within my brain Full chatactered with lasting memoryn p. 60 Which shall aboves inoidle rank remain Beyongall date even to eternity. Ot at the least, so long as braie and heart Have faculty by eature to subsist, Till each tohKe vd oblivion yield his batt Of thee, thy record neveycan be missed: That poor reivtion could not so much holdwhcor need I tallies thy dear l see to score, Therefore to gi,e them from me was I bold, ToshChothose tables that receivmIee more: To keep an adjO er to remember thee Were to ioehort forgetfulness in me. P o ha   No! Time, thou shalt eot boast that I do change, Thyhhyramids built up with newiumight To me are nothing novrcmeothing strange, They arehsut dressings Of a former sie rtae lr r dates are brief, aed therefore we admire, What ts  o dost foist upon us that is ofne And rather make them bornsu our desire, Than think thamhghsefore have heard them toladn fhy registers and thee I b s yarsy, Not wond'ring at tiopresent, nor the past, For Iy records, and what we see df m nasylUaomore or less by tso  emetinual haste: This I doseow and this shall ever be, Lwill be true despite thy scyoioand thee. 124 If my deat love were but the child of sln,, It might for Fortune'shsastard be unfathered, As sufject to time's love or to tion's hate, p. 61 Weeds aml6hcks, or flowers with flohcts gathered. No it was bui.a nTar from accident, It sWhsers not in smiling pomp, a hofalls Under the blow of thtalled discontent, Whereto thr  inviting time our fashion ca eh.aols Tears not policy thauheretic, Which works on lenvs of short-numbered hourswWr t all alone stands hugely lulitic, That it nor grows wiI heat, nor drowns with showees. To this I witness call the tm Ituf time, Which die for c udness, who have lived for ctime. 125 Were't aught toh n I bore the canopy, With 8gllsise the outward honourieg, Or laid great bases for elEeity, Which proves more sghtothan waste or ruining? Hadg l dut seen dwellers on forAaed favour Lose all, and mote by paying too much rent Flucompound sweet; forgoing ,n ehle savour, Pitiful thradcts in their gazing spent3No, let me be obsequious ie thy heart, And take thou myublation, poor but free, Wh.tmE not mixed with secondswhdnows no art, But mutual reeder, only me for thee. Hencre thou suborned informer, a ttue soul When most impeachedw Eaeds least in thy control. toL ge ulb r u my lovely boy e r  in thy power, Dost hold Tv n's fickle glass his fick a  r ur: Who hast by waning hht wn, and therein show'st, bhpg ' ufhy lovers witherincgdtf i   sweet self grow'st.  hf Nature (sovereign mistibs over wrack) As thou goe r onwards still will pluck ti, back, She keeps thee to tsE purpose, that her skill Mao shn n disgrace, and wretchk minutes kill. Yet fear het O thou minion of her pleasuire She may detain, but not sta ehhdeep her treasure! Her aodit (though delayed) ans.Ek must be, And her quietuthrfu render thee. 127 Ins ioold age black was not coOsgnTair, Or if it were it blsmeot beauty's name: But eow is black beauty's succe teene heir, And beauty slandisk with a bastard shame, Fot since each hand hath put on naLre's power, Fairing the loul with art's false borrowegface, Sweet beauty hath no eame no holy bower, But is prFaned, if not lives in disgrnen. Therefore my mistress' i  es are raven black, Her emb so suited, and they mournert vem, At such who not born favono beauty lack, Slander?e  ee,ation with a false estei he Yet so they mourn becomieg of their woe, That every toegue says beauty should look s sw128 How oft when thou,h e  h t sic, music play'st, q r n that blessed wood whose m she n sounds With thy sweet fiegers when thou gently sway'suThe wiry concord that mine eat confounds, Do I envy thosmdea,eds that nimble leap, 5hdiss the tender inward of thy iak, p. 63 Whilst my pSt lips which should that har,est reap, At the wood's boldeess by thee blushing stand. sh  be so tickled they would chaege their state And situationslc mIose dancing chips, Or er whom thy fingers walk wiI gentle gait, Making dead huod more blest than living lvhs, Since saucy jacks so salhhy are in this, Give thems i   fingers, me thy lips to kEs. 129 Th' expense of ,hirit in a waste of shame Is f  P?d,rion, and till actioe, lust Is perjured, murd'tous, bloody full of blame, t aiieecggllsteme, rude, crM ee not to trust, Enjoyed no wuner but despised straight,st atr reason hunted, and no soli1ienst atr reason hated as a . allowed bait, On purpose  anibu make the taker mad. Iavhaopursuit and in possessi d  wsm Biee having, and in veoest, to have extreme, A blEs in proof and proved, a viso sSre Before a joy propo nd behind a dream. All this tioworld well knows yet none keows well, To shun the heavens inoleads men to this hell. 1dohgt l,  h errress' eyes are n s id6 nnde the sun, Coral isTar more red, than her lips reag lT snow be white, why then iPfreasts are dun: If hairthse wires, black wires growun her head: I have seen roseh aaoateded, red and white, BT du such roses see I in her chei n.op. 64 And in some peefumes is there more delight, ss:oin the breath that from myh errress reeks. I love to heat her speak, yet well I knowg fhat music hath a far more Yeasing sound: I grant I ne,er saw a goddess go, My misteess when she walks treads on tdoground. And yet by heaven  h think my love as rare, As aey she belied with false compate. 131 Thou art as tyraaeous, so as thou art, As those wr se beauties proudly make tsi ueeSrgl Wh r well thou knohhust to my dear doting heart Ir u art the fairest and most pY,e us jewel. Yet in good laith some say that thee beholdw fhy face hath not the power toh aede love groan; To say theo ctr, I dare not be so bold, rhc r ugh I swear it to my selfd(iti And to be sure that is eot false I swear, A thousand hht ans but thinking on thy faen, One on another's neck do hhevess bear Thy black is fav,st in my judgment's plaen. In nothing art thou blacimdene in thy deeds, And thencmIis slander as I think prodeeds. 132 Thine eyes I lo,e, and they as pitying me, ?nowing thy heart torment me .c yaEdain, Have put on blneed, and loving mourners bew S uking with pretty ruth ub d h e  hhain. And truly not thmomtning sun of heaven Bettet becomes the grey cheeks of tsmieEghcor that full star thauushers in the even p. 65 vt th half that glory to the sobauwest As those two mourning emb become thy face: O let its iv as well beseem thy heart sh  mourn for me since mourninh  a s mIee grace, And suit thyhhity like in every part. Tiv will I swear beauty herse,s is black, And all they fo  l that thy complexion lackebt sn sn  Wa tisrythat heart tsaumakes my heart to groan Fluthat deep wound it gives my  ,.end and me; Is't not enouh ms  surture me alone, But sladgsu slavery my sweet'st frqlp t st be? Me from my sel ts i   cruel eye hath taken, Aed my next self thou harder haPiYs  tvd, Of him, my sell, and thee I am forsaken, A whwdds s is.v three-fold thuhsu be crossed: Prison my heatt in thy steel bosom's wardwWr t then my friend's heart lromy poor heart bail, WhoeAiukeeps me, let my heart be hE guard, Thou canst not then uv rigour in my gaol. And ynothou wilt, for I being penthaothee, Perforce am thine aed all that is in me. 134 S  duw I have confessed that he nts idite And I my self am mob ed,gnsu thy will, My self swoll forfeit, so that other miee, Thou wilt restore to be my emobort still: But thou wilunot, nor he will not be free,Wh r thou art covetous, and hehrl a?agW e learned but suresosnhdd ams  sls,, for me, p.hg eg fadlahothat bond that hioletTist doth bind. The statusm T thy beauty thou wilt takre Thou usurer that put'st foeth all to use, And sue a friendg eae n debtor for my sake, o y id ul 5v through my unkied abuse. Him have I lost, tg o hast both him and me, He pao ts iowhole, and yet am I not  ,,e. 135 Whoever hath hee wish, thou hast thy will, Ang'Will' to boot, and 'Wilvu in over-plus, More than ir ugh am I that vex thee stil ee To thy sweet will making nna,.on thus. Wilt thou whoseslgehhrBatge and spacious, iws unce vouchsafe to hide my hhegpaothine? Shall will ie others seem right gracious, ya nhaomy will no fair acceplaNe shine? The sea all watebmocureceives rain still, Aed in abundance addeth to his ss h,, So thou being rich in w,gkvnsu thy will One will otl cagsu make thy large willh mte. Let no unkind, no faiybeseechers kill, Think allhsut one, and me in that one 'Till.' 136 If thy soul csNk thee that I come so near, t i ear to thy blind soul that Islets i   'Will', And will ti   soul knows is admitted therre Thus far for love, my lovra tt it sweet fulfil. 'WillSgslgehTulfil the treasure otf i   love, Ay, fill it fullslc mhhegrioand my will one, ld s idz of great receipt wiI case we prove, Among a nuoeser one is reckoned none. ptpg ier fhen in the number let on pass untold, Though in thy E h,'s account I one must begWh r nothing hold me, so it p adtn thee hold, That nothing ksmn wh nthing sweet to thee. Iaede but my name thy love, aed love that still, And then thoo lov'st me for my name is W,gei 137 Thou blind fool S see, what dost thou to mine emb, That they behold and see n s soinothey see? They know winobeauty is, see where it lie.oYet what the best is, take Ie worst to be. If eyes corruls hsy over-partial looks,  ln anchored in the bay where a ehh nn ride, Why of eyes' fa rnhood hast thou forged hooksw F,reto the judgment of my siasuis tied? Why should my siasuthink that a several plore Which my heart knows the wnamhurld's common place? Ot mine eyes seeing this, say tihthrlr t To put fair truth ub d  w Toul a face? In things tight true my heart and eyes hadgctred, And to this false pjm gde, they now transferredhbt sn hg   F,n my love swear f inoshe is made of truth, I dohselieve her though I know shm na .oThat she might think mywh n untutored youth, Unleatned in the world's false subBr.es. Thus vainly thinkine s inoshe thinks me young, A,luugh she knows my days are ldtr the best, Simply I cred,oher false-speaking tongMg laoboth sides thus is simplmstuth suppressed: p. 68Wr t wherefore says she not shmE unjust? And wherefore sao dut I that I am old? O lo,e's best habit is in seeming lLst, And age in love, lovesdut to have years told. Thereomte I lie with her, and she wiomon, And in our faults by lib we flattered be. 139 O eaY not me to justify the wi d esyfhat thy unkindness layt opon my heart, Wound me notslc mIine eye but with thy tone oe, Use power with power, aed slay me not by art, Tell mmIou lov'st elsewhere; but ?h e   ,iorte Dear heart forbiauto glance thine eye aside, FU dck'st thou wound with ht nning when thy might Is mormIan my o'erpressed defence eaa hside? Let me excuse thite ah my love well knows, Hiupretty looks have been minmiiwcns, And therefore fromh e  Tace she turns my foes, Thauthey elsewhere might dart thiduinjuries: Yet do not sowhsut since I am near slain, ?ill me outright with looks, aed rid my pain. 140 Be ehrn as thou art cruel, do not btess My tongue-tied patienhn with too much disdain: Lesusorrow lend me words and worcx egisbs, The manner of myhhity-wanting pain. If I N, roteach thee wit better it tcte, Though not to love, yet l see to tell me so, As testy siclp nn when their deaths be neae, No news but health from thevophysicians know. For if l  tr uld despair I should groe h aq hh. 69 And in my maaeess might speak ill of theewhcow this ill-wresting worfehroeht wn so bad, Mad slandisiT by mad ears believed bni That I may not be so, nor thoo belied, Bear thine eyes stia.orte though thy proud heart eu wide. 141 In faith I d  dut love thee with mine eyes,Wh r they in thee a thousand eri hf note, But 'tis my heart tdnoloves what they despise, Ws  haodespite of view is pleask to dote. Nor are mine cars thel s i   tongue's tune delightk, Nor tender feeling to basms  oches prone, Nor taste, nlusmell, desire to be invited fo any sensual feast with thee a e ne: But my five wits, not my five senses can Dissuadm dgToolish heart from servieg thee, Who leaves unswayed tiolikeness of a man, Thy prood heart's slave and vassal .srltms  hse: Only my plagumIus far I count my gain, Tdnoshe that makes me sin, awarnth n pain. 142 Love is mo  ,ate and thy dear virtue hav, Hate of my sin, grounded ly,atsul loving, O but with oea,, compare thou thine own cdre, And thou shalt find it mis,f not reproving, Or if iudo, not from those lips of thiee, That have profaned their teaetdtoornaments, And sealegfalse bonds of love as oft ash ea,, Robbed others' beds'h,venues of their rents. Be iulawful I love thee as thou lfe'st those, p. 70 Whom thUmi  es woo as mine importunes i,, Root pity in thy heart tinowhen it grows, Thy pity mao  aberve to pitied be. If tr u dost seek to have what thou d  1ihare By self-examplmoae  PIou be denied. 143 S  dtle eae,ful huswife runuto catch, One of her featheregcreatures broke away, Setudown her babe and makes all  i ift dispatch In pursuit ofs iothing she would have stayKWhilst her neglected child gInt iP? e.ev, Cries to caMh her whose busy care is benre To follow that which flies fefore her face: Not priz?e  iPluor infant's disconlvt; So run'st thou after thauwhich flies from thee, WhifhoI thy babe chase thee afar rnhind, But if thou catch thy r pe turn back to me: And b an  s iomother's part, kiss ksmfe kind. So will I prays inothou mayst have thy Willg lT thou turn back and my lood crying still. 144 Two4dgt l  inne of comfort and dbpair, Which like two spieits do suggest me still, The ktt,r angel is a man right fait: The worser spirit a woman em e ured ill. To win me soon s   itgp e  Temale evil, Tempsrl h e  hsetter angel from my s.asmBk would corrupt my saUuto be a devil: Wooing hithhurity with her foul prideRBk whether that my angel bes orned fiend, Suspect I mamgh cunot directly tell, p. viho Wr t being both from me z ms  cnewTriend, I guess onmaegel in another's hell. Yrothis shall I ne'er know butOcee in doubt, Till my bad aegel fire my good one out. 1lotg  Those lips that Love's  slyiak did make, Breathed tmtth the sound that said 'I hasi o, To me that languished fot her sake: But when she saw 8sSrsul state, Straight in siuheart did mercy come, Chia?e s inotongue that ever swerte Was used in giving gentle a um: And taught it thus anet su greet: 'I hate' she alteeed with an end, That followegit as gentle day, Doth follot dhiorowho like a fiend Froy iUeen to hell is flown awayvhuI hate', from hate away shmIrew, And saved my life saohalohunot you'. 146 Polusoul the centre of my sinfuBdetlsyl,   ,atsul earth these tebel powers array, Why dosts r u pine within and suffer diasI Painting thy outward wa eht w  eyE n   ede sa  Why so latge cost having so short a leadte Dost thou upon thy fadingh aa ,e n spend? Shall wormshalctitors of this excess Eat op thy charge? is this thy boaohus end? Then soul live thoo upon thy servant's loss, Aed let that pine to aggravate py store; p. 72 Buy termt a,nine in selling hours of dtoss; Within be fed, withouthse rich no more, So shall thouTeed on death, that feeds on mare And death once dead, therer s no more dying then. 14Dol,  4dghrletdFever longieg still, For that which longiunurseth the disease, Feedinh un that which doth preserve tsm,gee Th' uncertain sicklydehpetite to please: My renwd s iophysician to my love,hOllso s inohis prescriptiontde, not kept Hath left me, aed I desperate now approve,sn,sire is death, which physieoa.)esii rti Past cure I aoionow reason is past care, Aed frantic-mad with evermote unrest, My thoughts and my aEcourse as mad men's are, yr random from the truth vainlo glllh,ssed. For I have swlse thee fair, and thought thee fright, Who art as black as srgee as dark as night. 14p   O me! what eyes hath love A s haomy head, Which have no hmtrespondence with true sighsg lnoif they have, where is mo satodgment fled, That censI,s falsely what they see arigrtao lT that be fair whereon 8Talse eyes dote, What meanss ioworld to say it is not so? sts it be not, then love doth we,h air te, Love's eye is not soshSmntdY men's: no, How eaa hetao lmt w can love's eymfe true, That is so vexed wiI watching and with tears? pyh aetnel then though I mistaia h e  seiew, p. 73 The sun ,oself sees not, till heaven c adef. O cunning love, withscats thou keep'st me blind, Sbt eyes well-seeing thy fool faults should find. 149Ldaft thou O cruel, say I l see thee not, When I against 8 vlf with thee partake? -   l dut think on thee when I fotgot Am of my self, all-tyiaet, for thy sake? Who hatetuthee that I do call my friendg laowhom frown'st thou that sodo fawn upon, Nay if thou l  or'st on me do I not spend Rrnenge upon my self with presiromoan? What merit do I in oe   vlf respect, That is so p'ud thy service to despise, Liv all my best doth worship tso  arsect, Commanded by the oms, n of thine eyes? But lo,e hate on for now I know thy m?ag fhose that can see thou lo,'st, and I am blind. 15ps O from what power hast thou Iis powerful might, With intofficiency my heart to swayg fo make me give the lie to mo shSy,iorte And swear that btightness doth not grace the daosa  Whence hast thou this becl ca e uf things ill, That in tsmdcty refuse of thy deeds, TsismE such strength and warraetise of skill, That in my maed thy worst all best exceedca  Who taught thee how to makeh n love thee more, The more I siauand see just cause of hatrao lb r ugh I love what otherudo abhor, p. 74 With othees thou shouldst not abhor my stasri If thy unworthiness raisk love in me, More worthy I Gfe beloved of thee. 151 S see is too young to know whayemescience is, Yet who knot tdut conscience is born of lfee? Then gentle cheater urgmeot my amiss, Lest guilty oSoe  Taults thy sweet self pro,e. For thou betraying me, I a  hsetray My nobler part to oe   eht ss body's treason, My w ol doth tell my body that he kn syfriumph in love, flesh Eao tdu farther reason, But prealodr thy name doth point o  t thee, As his triumphant pralov, proud of this pride, FmE contented thy poor drudgesu be, To stand in thy affair.ofall by thy side. No wantuf conscience hold it that I ca ecm Bholove, for whose deaylove I rise and fall. 15G In loving thee thou know'so l de Forsworn, But thou art rpiv forsworn to me love sweating, In act thy bed-vow btoke and new faith torn, In !hhalodch  in, after new lovehsearing: But why of two oatb' breach do I accuse thee, s .v I break twenty? I am bisdet red most, For all my vfotde, oaths but to misuse theeKAnd all my honest faith in ti, is lost. For I have sworn aiwm drhs of thy deep kindneh.aolael tuf thy love, thy trT re thy constancy, And to enl.or,n thee gave eyes to blindeess, Or made them swear agaiest the thing they see. p. 7sy For I have sworn thee fairKmore perjured I, To sweard,deaft the truth so foul a betbt  losn  Ls hhid laid by his re:lka nTell asleep, A maigof Dian's this advantage f  ond, And his love-kindlieg fire did quickly steep Ie a cold valley-fountain ofs inoground: Which borrowegfrom this holy fire of LovewhLaasrdfs lively heat still s  cedure, And grew a seetinghsath which yet men prove, Ahdeaft strange maladies a sovasihed  et re: But at my mistrbs' eye Love's brand new- ,n,d, The boy for trial neecTC Insuuch my breast, I sihed withal the help of bath desv,d, And thither hied a sad dnEi giEk guest. But found eo cure, the bath for my help l-he Where Cupid got new fiee; my mistress' eyes. 15sm The little Love-god lyinh unce asleep, Laid by his sidyiht ijssncaTlaming branag F.lst many nymphs that v sllmrieEm nese to keep, Cak sh.pping by, but in her ma.ad  iak, The fairest votaro suok up that fire, Which maey legions of true hearts had tdewd aghOlmh  the general of s s  abire, Was sleeping by aseirgin hand disarmed. This frand she quenched in a cool ec ehhsy, Which from Love'sTire took heat perpetual, Gtowing a bath and healthful ri d aosm for men discased, buo l h e  h errress' thrall, p. viloW  ae n there for cure and oihthsy that I prove, Love'ufire heats water, water coolsdut love.THE END<<shLlLfttuECTRONIC Ve.IuthON OF THE COMRLETE WORKS OF WILLlhT e'A AKESPEARE x W  tdPYRIGHT 199ps-1993 BY WORLD C rOhl;rgecylhcC., ANvoISPROVIDED BY w iT alolECT GUTENBEwhu fttsEXT OF ILLINM ruHnrecEDICTINE CO uLEGEWITH PERMISF Aa eihsttuECTRONIC Al.eoMACHINE READAfruE COPIES MAY BE?lLtsRIBUTED SO LON o l l oHhawohLLs ahothES Y1) ARE FOR YOUR OhS nfHERSPERSONALsahuis ONLY, AND (2iC;rhrl etdT DISTRIBDfED OR USEDCOMMEel os i f oLY. PROHIBIshrieoCOMMERCIAL DIt tsRIBUTION INCLUvtr'Ha ehhxillSERVICet fHAT CHARGES FOE DOWNLOAD TIME OR tsOR MEMBERSHIP.8we fhohg eg.e hT oLS WELL fHAT ENDS WELLby W,gnan HsKabpeareDramatrtst nrsonae KING OF FRrge'hrofHE DUKE OF FC ahlh,cCE BERTRAM, t h unt of Rousillon LAFE:gda uld lord PAROLLESwdFollower of Bertram p. Dier fWO FRENCH LORvtuioserving with Bertram Sshrtx iIasgLnrvant to the C  ontess of Rousillon LAVA ohWh.oa clown and Servant w s ioCountess of Rousillon 'st eIu is, Servant to the Couetess of Rousillon COUNTtwo'oleT ROUSILLON, p ther to Bertram HELENAwdoecetlewoman protected by oioCountess A WIDOW OF fs oORENCE. DIANA, dnoghter to the Widow VIOLwecTA, neighbour and friendsu the Widow MARIANA, nihe i w or and friend to the Wid so S hlrioOfficers, SoldiiT, etc., French and Floreetine<<THIS ELECTws altlLTnpriIuthON OF T FtH tdMPLETE WORKHOF WILLIAMSHAKE;r isARE IS COPYRIGtuf 1990-1993 Bph F ahf oD LIBRARY, O e'hi, AND ISPROVIvtrieoBY PROJECT GDfENBERG ETEXT Oful C oINOIS BENEDISTINE COLLEGEWITH toisRMISSION. ELECThf altlLIxidt MACHIN,fthreIas;M oE COPIES  cAY BEDISTRIBUTEat SO LONG AS SUCH SOPIES (1) ARE FO,IgrdUR OR OTHERSP,iIutdNAL USE ONLY, B eieo(2) ARE NOT D hSTRIBUTED OR USEatCOMMERCIALLY. RROHIBITED COMMER os i f o DISTRIBUTIOpolhcCLUDES BY ANYt isRVICE THAT CHAR o isS FOR DOWNLOAD  sIME OR FOR MEMBEESHIP.>>SCENE:,h usillon; Paris; Florende; Marseilles p. 78ACsulswSCENE 1.Rousillonhm tioCOUNT'S palaceEeter BERTRAM, the COUitfESS OF ROUSILLOpioHELENA, and LAFEUgdY in black COUNTES oih ld  ardceering my son frool dsyl hsury a second husbandhA nriT .x tc. And I in gld0moa:e ioweep o'er my faIer's death anew; but I muc drtend his Majesty's comkalee to whom I am now in wardgcdctmore in subjection. u AFEU. You shall find ofs ioKing a husband, madam;h uu, sir, a father. He that s   eceerally is at all times goonh t st of necessity hold his vvtSms  h uu, whose worthiness huuld stir it up where it wantk, rather than lack it where oiEmE such abundance. COq etsESS. What hope is therm T his Majesty's amendmensdyLAFEU. He hath aband dhud his physicians, madamfounder whose practices he hatupersecuted time with hope, aed finds no other advantage ie the process but only the losieg of hope by time. COUNThwo'ih fhis young gentlewomae had a father- O, that 'hadc2t w sad a passage 'tis!vhmt se skill was almost as grinoas his honesty; had it strete. od so far, would have madeddrure immortal, and death sh  old have play for lack of w hwahm l  old, for the King'h : are he were living! I thaek it would be the death of thmdehall os disease. LAFEUeA Sh  eaY'd you the man you ,heak of, madam? COUNuisSS. He was famous, sir, ? ihthhrofession, and it was sE great right to be so- Geratd de Narbon. LAFEU. FmhdtlB ,nllent indeed, madaoAothe King very lately spl am T him admiringly and mo  rningly; he was skilful enoogh to have liv'd still, if lat wledge could be set up aga?Pomttality. BERTRAsihm fU hrlcsmoe   euod lord, pe King languishes of? LA fEU. A fistula, my lord.WeriT .x tc. I heard not ofheobefore. LAFEU. I wou.peowere not notorious. Was tiht ecetlewoman the p. 79 dnoghter of Gerard de Narboe? COUNTESS. His sole e.giee my lord, and bequeaoilbu my overlooking. I ha,e those hopes of her good that hiueducation promises; her di,hositions she inherits, whicumakes fair gifts fairer; f howhere an unclean mind cari-Teirtuous qualities, theiyemoe nndations go with pityvhlco de, virtues and traitortsuo. In her they are the bettet for their simpleness; she das,nes her honesty, and achieKt i1euodness. LAFEU. pg or commendations, madam, hcufrom her tears. COUNTtwo'ihhuTis the best brine a kniad  eaa  vason her praise ie. The remembrance of her fatiPeever approaches her hearubut the tyranny of her sorrowtsdedes all livelihood from hiucheek. No more of this, Hrdva; go to, no more, lest it fe rather thought you affect n whE sos iams   inne- HELEl,Ii I do affect a sorrow indilee but I have it too. LAFe.nih lw aisasm an nntation ihs ioright of the dead: exces,ene grief the enemy to the li,ing. COUNTESS. If thm nening be enemy to the griefgs ioexcess makes it soon moisa ei BERTRAM. Madam, l  abire your holy wishes. LrhTEU. How understand we tsasdyCOUNTESS. Be thouhslest, Bertram, and succeegthy father In manners, as in tia ita ufhy blood and virtum oh ntend for empire in thee, aed thy goodness Share with tho hsirthright! Love all, truPnTew, Do wrong to none; rn able for thine enemy Rathee in power than use, and keep py friend Under thy own lifi os key; be check'd for siqlv, But never tax'd for  eheech. What heaven more wil,e That thee may furnish, andh e  hhrayers pluck down, Fa,hun thy head! Farewell. Mo 4td, 'Tis an unseason'd dourtier; good my lord, Advnv him. LAFEU. He cannouwant the best p. 80 That hingkrtend his love. COUptsESS. Heaven bless him- Farewell, Bertram. ExitWeriT .x tc. The best wishb that can be forg'd in your poughts be servants to you! vmTo HELENA] Be comflssafle to my mother, your mich,ss, and make much of her. S;TEU. Farewell, pretto OeaoWoyou must hold the cred,oof your father. Exeunt Bh.T .x tc and LAFEU H,tuENA. O, were that all! l s idi ndut on my father; Anns ife great tears grace his ri dh esrance more Than those I  .lAh r him. What was he likrao l  inne forgot him; my imnehaUhe n Carries no favour USubut Bertram's. I am uedone; there is no living, noee, If Bertram be away. 'Thcte all one That I should lovmnhsright particular star Aed think to wed it, he is so abfee me. In his bright radiande and collateral light Must Lbe comforted, not in his sphisri Th' ambition in my loves 's plagues itself: The hied that would be mated by the l, n Must die for love. 'Twahhhretty, though a plague, To ve him every hour; to sit angdraw His arched brows, his dnpding eye, his curls, In oIoheart's table-heart too caldesle Of every line and trihed of his sweet favour. But a so iwos gone, and my idolatroos fancy Must sanctify his rrdhetih Ft  comes here? Entee PAROLLES [Aside] la, that goes with him. I lovyid Wh r his sake; And yet Ihdnow him a notorious liar, Tidi n id Ooeh,at way fool, soDd   a coward; Yet these fiIgod evils sit so fit in him Thauthey take place when virtMCuEitd   bones p. 81 Lol nthsleak i' th' cold windHslc incm toll oft we see Coldslhta h flachaloun superfluo  s folly. PAROLLES. Sadgh uu, fair queen! HEWh,cA. And you, monarch! toeIrs nC oES. No. HELEl,Ii And no. PAROLLE;i Are you meditating on virhha.ty? HELENA. Ay. Nyo have some stain of soldier ?h uu; let me ask you a queche n. Man is enemy to virgieity; how may we barricado iuagainst him? PAROLLEt ihsal,p him out. HELENyihWr t he assails; and our vitginity, though valiant in tiodefence, yet is weak. Unom ibu us some warlike resistaece. PAROLLES. There E none. Man, setting down brsore you, will undermine youda nhslow you up. HELENb. Bless our poor virginity tet m underminers and blowersdf hh! Is there no military b Ohee   r w virgins might bloh  op men? PAROLLES. vNelldich  hseing blown dowagh aa slgehsneoicklier be bl slyop; marry, in blowing id ua slmnedeate with the breaewh uurselves made, you lose m  or city. It is not politic ie the commonwealth of nature w hhreserve virginity. Loss F virginity is rational inctease; and there was never vitgin got till virginity was oenft lost. That you were madeuf is metal to make virginsRdwenlldich  hsy being once l  Poae  hse ten times found; bo hseing ever kept, it is evee lost. 'Tis too cold a compaeion; away with't. HELEi,Ii I will stand for 't a lirtdte though therefore I die a ,irgin. PAROLLES. Thisi os little can be said in 'wl hutis against the rule of na're. To speak on the part of dhnlldich  hrfu accuse your p thers; which is most infallafle disobedience. He that haegs himself is a virgin; vitginity murders itself, and hr uld be buried in highwayswuut of all sanctified limit,dtle abperate offendress aga?Peature. Virginity bralrl cres, much like a cheeseth consumes itself to the very ide.ng, and so dies with p. p  2 feeding his own stomach.Wa ,ia .ovirginity is peevntre proud, idle, made of seltiehgsee, which is the most inhvsited sin in the canon. Keei heonot; you cannot choose buulose by't. Out with't. WiIin ten year it will make itdtgtsce, which is a goodly inhe,ase; and the principal itvlf not much the worse. Awayslc i ot. HELENA. How m.oroone do, sir, to lose it to hiuown liking? PAROLL,'ih Srome see. Marry, ill G nnde him that ne'er it like.hhuTis a commodity will losmIe gloss with lying; the loeger kept, the less worth. Olf with't while 'tis vendiblrI answer the time of requesfwVirginity, like an old dourtier, wears her cap out ofTashion, richly suited but uesuitable; just like the br uch and the toothpick, whichslj dut now. Your date is brt,r in your pie and your poitidge than in your cheek. Annh uur virginity, your old ,irginity, is like one of our  french wither'd pears: it l uks ill, it eats drily; maity, 'tis a wither'd pear; iuwas formerly better; marrmgh cu'tis a wither'd pear. Bgehh uu anything with it? tTttuENA. Not my virginiso h cshm tiEytingp uur mastiuhave a thousand loves, A moper, and a mistress, and a fraik, A phoenix, captain, aed an enemy, A guide, a goddbs, and a sovereign, A coundtge r, a traitress, and a deaA m ;ro'mble ambition, prood humility, His jarring hmecord, and his discord dulcrte His faith, his sweet disassis l slc mnsStld Of prettywTond, adoptious christendoyt fhat blinking Cupid gossvhs. Now shall he- I know n s soinohe shall. God send himsltgea ufhe court's a learnieg-place, and he is one- Prhrs nC oES. What one, i' fa,lsa  HELENA. That I wrtmhc ecw'Tis pity- PARseC oES. What's pity? H,tuENA. That wishing well snndut a body in't p. 83 us.ch might be felt; that we,s iopoorer born, Whose baser Eats do shut us up in wishes, si.orowith effects of them fo,gsouur friends And show whaosloalone must think, which nrner Returns us thanks. EntauPAGE PAGE. Monsieue Parolles, my lord calls foe you. Exit PAGE PARM oLES. Little Helen, farnN egl hes I can remember there I will think of thee at coubswHELENA. Monsieur Patolles, you were born under n e.as,Kwa  Eat. PAROLu ES. Under Mars, I. HEWh,cA. I especially thinkw onder Mars. PAROLLEShm fw  under Man? HELEN;i The wars hath so kept you O aiuthat you must needs be botn under Mars. PAROLLEt ih F,n he was predominant.W ELENA. When he was retroehqn, I think, rather. PyiT nC oES. Why think you gsa  HELENA. You go so muewhsackward when you fighttbt eIrs nC oES. That's foe advantage. HELENA. SohrlLnning away, when fear iht poses the safety: but the domposition that your valour aed fear makes in you is a virLe of a good wing, and I likmIe wear well. PAROLLE oih l de ow Tull of business Lcannot answer thee acutely. l slgehh,turn perfect courtiis l haothe which my instructi d  tingmdhtne to naturalizes i,, so thou wilt be capableuf a courtier's counsel, and onderstand what advice shalls iLst upon thee; else thou dibt in thine unthankfulness, aed thine ignorance makes theedi ay. Farewell. When thou snP ahrt re, say thy prayersth when thou hast none, remembauthy friends. Get thee a googhusband and use him as he usess i,. So, farewell. Exit bhpg  loHfttuENA. Our remkies oft in ourselves do lie, F.ch we ascribe to heaven.  she fated sky Gives us free Mope; only doth backward poll Our slow designs when we oorselves are dull. What powiuis it which mounts my love so ihe re That makes me see, angcannot feed mine eye? The mre r.est space in fortune natute brings To join like likb, and kiss like native thinh .h lh ehossible be strange aEi grf to those That weigh theit pains in sense, and do suppov What hath been cannot be.  Tt  ever strove To show her meeit that did miss her love? Thmdehall os disease-my projNt may deceive me, But my ietents are fix'd, and will eot leave me. ExitACT I. t 'hrecE 2.Paris. The Kswe' euS palaceFlourish of hmtnets. Enter the KING O f FRANCE, with letters,aed divers ATTENDANTSsaolhcG. The Florentines aed Senoys are by th' ears; HadgTought with equal fortuee, and continue A braving wat. FIRST LORD. So 'lhth,ported, sir. KING. l:  , 'tis most credible. WyiEmteceive it, A certaintmgseouch'd from our cousin 'ostria, With caution, that thm florentine will move us Fot speedy aid; wherein our deatest friend Prejudicates thmfusiness, and would seem To inne us make denial. FIRSf LORD. His love and wisd h iop. 85 Approv'd so t  h uur Majesty, may plead osor amplest credence. KIN o ihW e hath arm'd our answerghOlA we rence is denied bef h, he comes; Yet, for our girtdwdd s inomean to see The Tuteaa  vrvice, freely have thi   leave To stand on either patt. SECOND LORD. It ec ehh ae   vrve A nursery to oIogentry, who are sick For ksinlhaloda nglll4,ti KIp' ih FUhus he comes here? wasct BERTRAM, LAFE7maed PAROLLES FIRF t C ahldt. It is the Count Eousillon, my good lord, Youeg Bertram. KING. Youtre thou bear'st thy father's  UirI Frank nature, rather et rious than in haste, Hath wrgmi h ehos'd thee. Thy fathet's moral parts Mayst thou ieherit too! Welcome to ParishA nriT .x tc. My thanks aed duty are your Majesty'shbaolhcG. I would I had thaucorporal soundness now, As h iv thy father and myself in  ,.endship First tried our s;a7 tid ri He did look far svto the service of the time, aed was Discipled of the bra,est. He lasted long; But on os both did haggish age steal lre And wore us out of act. Ith t ch repairs me To talk of y  or good father. In his youth t5iens iowit which I can wel 'bserve To-day in our youeg lords; but they may jest scY their own scorn return to Iem unnoted Ere they can hides i.r levity in honour. So lila doeyortier, contempt nor reet,rness p. 86 Were in hnthhride or sharpness; if theyslEre His equal had awak'ns iwhI and his honour, Cloclbu itself, knew the true mieute when Exception bid him ,heak, and at this time His t d e oe obey'd his hand. Who wismfelow him He us'd as creaLres of another place; And fow'd his eminent top to their4h h:wn.oMaking them prood of his humility In their pSt praise he humbled. Such nh aa  l,iorobe a copy to these ouunger times; Which, follfllbltgee would demonstrate tiwOuw But goers backwardvWeriT .x tc. His good remi g,:lv, sir, Lies richer ie your thoughts than on his tomf; So in approof lives not hE epitaph As in your royal slcNh. KING. Would I weee with him! He would alwayh :  - Methinks I hear him nfHyihthhlausive words He scassisCedut in ears, but grafsk them To grow there, and to fear- 'Let me not live'- ss.s his good melancholy oft bYare On the catastrophe and i,l of pastime, When it was oot-'Let me not live' quotuhe 'After my flame lacks oa ee to be the snuff Of youngee spirits, whose apprehensivyvnses All but new things dihaaU l sor se judgments are Inre fathers of their garments l sor se constancies Expirehsefore their fashions.' Thih iowish'd. I, after him, dodbter him wish too, Since I n howax nor honey can bring hl dsyl sneoickly were dissol,ed from my hive, To give somm ansourers room. SECONvoLORD. You're loved, sit; They that least lend it you tingAa,ed you first. KIp' ih l Till a place, I knowSshA Sh 4eg is't, Count, isw87 Since the physiciae at your father's died? He .eth t ch fam'd. BERTRAIihLmon six months since, my4td. KING. If he were l,ning, I would try him yetD Sik me an arm-the rest havmhurn me out With several apb nijhe ns. Nature and sickeess Debate it at their leisurri Welcome, Count; My sony tdu dearer. BERTRAM. ss:wnh uur Majesty. Exeuet [Flourish]ACT I. S ohrecE 3.Rousillon. The t s adiltf'S palaceEnter C dUNTESS, STEWARD,da nLs oOWN COUNTESShm mhhegkuw hear; what say m  o of this gentlewoman? STttB lhldt. Madam, the care I inne had to even your content l slhtmoeiorobe found in the ca ad aat of my past endeavour Aofor then we wound our modesi  , and make foul the clearnettuf our deservings, when of oorselves we publish them. G adiltfESS. What does this laUee here? Get you gone, svEnri The complaints I havyij nuf you I do not all belirne; 'tis my slowness that I a  dut, for I know you lack eot folly to commit them and hadgdesility enough to make suhwhdnaveries yours. CLOWi.hhuTis not unknown to you, oa:e ioI am a poor fellow. SOUNTESS. Well, sir. SLOWN. No, madam, 'tis eot so well that I am poor, thoue moaah  uf the rich are damn'a l hsut if I may have your lnao tid i os good will to go to tdoworld, Isbel the woman and  h will do as we may. COUNshr''ih Bgeothou needs be a meggar? CLOWN. I do begh uur good will in this case. isw88 COUNTESS. Insoinocase? CLOWN. In Isfel's case and mine own. Sebeice is no heritage; and I tddi n l  tingkcdct have the blbsing of God till I have issoe o' my body; for they say rae ns are blessings. COU).sSS. Tell me thy reason wso s r u wilt marry. CLOWNhm ee  hhoor body, madam, re:uires it. I am driven on by pe flesh; and he must needs gos inothe devil drives. COUltfESS. Is this all your wlThip's reason? CLOWN.Wdnelsmoa:e ioI have other h O   reasons, such as they are.Ls adiltfESS. May the wor ipdnow them? CLOWN. I sadghseen, madam, a wicked he,ature, as you and all fleshda nhslood are; and, indeed, l  a  h aeEo s inoI may repentvLs adiltfESS. Thy marrinecg wuner than thy wickedneh.hLs oOWN. I am out o' frqlriomadam, and I hope to hadgTriends for my wife's saiaswCOUNTESS. Such fiqlrlasmIine enemies, kna,e. CLOWN. Y'are shalloesmoa:e ieca  eh,at friendsHTor the knaves come to do thatTor me which I am aweary ofR B s inoears my land spares 8scaoioand gives me leave tohaothe crop. If I be his cucle ld, he's my drudge. He thaucomforts my wife is the chepr.P T my flesh and blood; iothat cherishes my flesh and flood loves my flesh and blood l  iothat loves my flesh and rXehrl g  friend; ergo, he oinokisses my wife is my friak. If men could be contentegto be what they are, there weimeo fear in marriage; for yoong Charbon the puritan anduld Poysam the papist, howsl dhuer their hearts are sever'nhaoreligion, their heads arehsoth one; they may jowl hores together like any deer i' ts2,rd. COUNTESS. Wi,othou ever be a foul-mouth'nda n eapomnious knave? CC nB eihhWlht phet I, madapI and I speak the truth the nelluway: For I the ballad w,gp,peat, Which men full teue shall find: Your marrineg emons by destiny, Your c  ckoo sings by kind. p. 8 o   COUNTESS. Get you hune, sir; I'll talk with yoo more anon. STEWARD. Iae  heoplease you, madam, thauhe bid Helen come to you. O t i1l de fu speak. COUNfESS. Sirrah, tell my gens asSoaa  l sC In ,heak with sis l W elen I mean. CLOWpihsnmSings] 'Was this faat face the cause' quoth she y Fw  the Grecians sacked Ti h sa  Fond done, done fond, Wnts ihtsald6hoe.am's joy-2 l,l s inoshe sighed as she  rood, With that she sighed as siostood, And gave this sentenhn then: 'Among nine bad iS dghse good, Among nine bad ,s one be good, There's yet oee good in ten.' COUNTES oih FUsm dg euod in ten? Y  o corrupt the song, sirrah.  os oOWN. One good woman insce, madam, which is a purilying o' th' song. Would GonsC In vrve the world so all pe year! We'd find no faulmhhel s iotithe-woman, if I tcte the parson. One in ten, veooth 'a! An we might have n euod woman born before evero hslazing star, or at an eaiIquake, 'twould mend the l sscty well: a man may draw iht ijs uut ere 'a pluck onni COUNTESS. You'll rn gone, sir knave, and do as l  emoe aa nh uu. CLOWN. WU h aa  tr uld be at woman's hmoe aa agda nh cuno hurt donev ofhough honesty be no puritae, yet it will do no hurt; it .gehslj s iosurplice of humi new  over the black gown of nhsig heart. I am going, forguth. The business is for Helims   emon hither. Exit COq etsESS. Well, now. STwtx iIashm mlat w, madam, yoo love your gentlewoman entitely. p. 90 COUNTESt ihWdnel  l  a swHer father brac caI'd her to me; and she iRdxhe without other advantnecgh ae  OnAs xe  h aede titlms  dtl s  ew4dgdtotiofinds. fhere is more owing her than i l iaha l da nh mte shall be parn iPIan she'll demand. SThtB lhldt. Madam, I was vety late more near her than I thiek she wish'd me. Alone she tdtioand did communicate to haTelf her own words to her own iaT; she thought, I dare vow  whoher, they touch'd not any Etanger sense. Her matter wn.oshe loved your son. Fortuee, she said, was no goddess, tsauhad put such difference brtprgr their two estates; Lo,e no god, that would not exteed his might only where qualis-TlEm aseel; Diana no 7 cim T virgins, that would s  ffer her poor knight surpri,ud without rescue in the firsuassault, or ransom afterwardhm tiht tiodeliver'd in the p st bitter touch of sorrow thaocSiuI heard virgin exclaioldrI which I held my duty sickily to acquaint you witdngl  ,elcece, in the loss thath ae   ia i iv, it concerns you wh nthing to know it. COUptsESS. YOU have dischampud this honestly; keep it t  h uurself. Many likelihoocIatsorm'd me of this beforewsoihew 'ng so tott'ring in tsmfalance that I could neithet believe nor misdoubt. Prao h uu leave me. Stall this inh uur bosom; and I thank youTor your honest care. I will ,heak with you further anon.sttgeeoSTEWARD Enter HetSh,cA Even so it was with k soiv I was young. If ever hgde, nature's, these are our Aothis thorn Doth to our rose F youth rightly belong; Ouyblood to us, this to our bloodhrl whv. It is the show and sea 'f nature's truth, Where loacCuEtong passion is impre teud in youth. By our rememksaeces of days foregone, SuhwslEm  or faults, or then we tr ught them none. Her eye is sneed on't; I observe her nowtph. 91 HELENA. What E your pleasure, madam? Csna,cTESS. You know, Hrdv, I am a mother to you. H,tuENA. Mine honourable mnEtess. COUNTESS. Namgdl h ther. Why not a mother3When I said 'a mother,' Mrluught you saw a serpent. Wdnwos in 'mother' That you statt at it? I say I am your mooiEghOlphut you in the catal  e oe of those That were enwombk mine. 'Tis often seen Adolshe n strives with nature, angchoice breeds A native sli'to us from foreign seeds. Yoo ne'er oppress'd me with a p ther's groan, Yet I exprbs to you a mother's care. GoaCI nrcy, maiden! does it ht rd thy blood To say I am thyh mIer? What's the matter,  shat this distempered messengiuof wet, The many-colour'n lh.s, rounds thine eye? WhosmIat you are my daughter?W ELENA. That I am not. o s adiltfESS. I say I am yoor mother. HELENA. Para dsmoa:e ih fhe Count Rousi egd  eaadut be my brother: soam from humble, he from honoored name; No note upon my batents, his all noble. My mnEisgh e   aiaulord he is; and l W is servant live, and wil m.s vassal die. He must not fe my brother. COUNTESt ihhcor I your mother? HEWh,cA. You are my mother, mnaaoAowould you were- So thaumy lord your son were not myhsrother- Indeed my mother- Or were you both our mothersw l  eae, no more for than I do lor heaven, So I were not his sEter. Can't no other, p. 2 o W eot, I your daughter, he b  Pfe my brother? COUNshr''ihhga .oHelen, you mih robe my daughter-in-lawtA  h d shield you mean it not3hudaughter' and 'mother' S   Etive upon your pulse. Whasdol indoagain? My fear haI catch'd your fondness. Nfo l  ve The myst'ry of your l dc na,ss, and find Your salutears' head. Now to all sen n 'tis gross You love my sonth invention is asham'd, Aga?PIe proclamation of thy idttee n, To say thou dost not. fherefore tell me true; But ltgp n then, 'tis so; for, lo hd, thy cheeks Confess it, tsG dgsu th' other; and thine i  es See it so grossly shown ins i   behaviours That in their lnalb iw  speak it; only sinhOlm,llish obstinacy tie thysungue, That truth should be tospected. Speak, is't so3If it be so, you have wound n euodly clew; If it be not,Torswear't; howe'er, I chatge thee, As heaven shall woripaome for thine avail, To te ehh n truly. HELENA. GCeh a:e iopardon me. COUitfESS. Do you love my sondyHELENA. Your pardongduble mistress. COUNT.SS. Love you my son? HEu ENA. Do not you love him,h a:e in Ls adiltfESS. Godut about; my love hath in'mnhsond Whereof the world takb note. Come, come, disclosyfhe state of your affectionfofor your passions Have to tsm toll appeach'd. HELEpeIi Then I confess, Here on oe  hdnee, before high heaven aed you, That before you, anddglluunto high heaven, I loKh uur son. My friends were b ur, but honest; so's my lojhA aonot offended, for it hutts not him p. 93 That he is  e v'd of me; I follow him nf Wn  dah  suken of presumptu  os suit, Nor would I have hiofhegm ya   aberve him; Yetdcdct know how that desert sho  ld be. I know I love in vaie, strive against hope; Yethaothis captious and intenib3,asee I still pour in the wasiT of my love, And lack nouto lose still. Thus, Indianvhdd are Religious in mine eitor, I adore The sun that looNuopon his worshipper But keows of him no more. My dearesumadam, Let not your hate endounter with my love, For loUa e soiEmouu do; but if youeself, Whose aged honour citeua virtuous youth, Did ever ie so true a flame of liking WEh chastely and love dearly oinoyour Dian Was both herse,s and Love; O, then, give ihew  To her whose state is such Iat cannot choose But lend ann ehene where she is sure to loseth That seeks not to find that hiusearch implies, But, ridd asnhdd are lives sweetly wheee she dies! COUNTESS.W ad you not lately an intentvsgiKnshS n snufo go to Parn.n W ELENA. Madam, I hnahA  tdUNTESS. Whereflsrao fell true. HELENA. l slgehsc ehshSI; by gracehefelf I swear. You know myTather left me some prescribs, ns Of rare and prov'd eftncts, such as his reading Angmanifest experience had co edlEk For general sovereicety; and that he will'd me Ie heedfull'st reservation to rnstow them, As notes whose faht lties inclusive were More tiamIey were in note. AmongsmIe rest There is a remedy, ablht v'd, set down, p. 94 fo cure the desperate languiss?e tsoiEr f The King is reeder'd lost. COUNTESSP tihtsleth uur motive For Patis, was it? Speak. HELh,cA. My lord your son madeh n to think of this, Else Paeis, and the medicine, and thesald0m BiAcum the conversas, n of my thoughts Haply biv absent then. COUNTE;uihWr t think you, Helen, T th uu should tender your supb  vd aid, He would receive iraoW e and his physicians Arm T a mind: he, that they caneot help him; They, that they eaadut help. How shall they he,dit A poor unlearned virgUgsoiv the schools, Embowe,d od of their doctrine, have Dooff The danger to itself?W ELENA. There's somethieg in't More than my father't ,dill, which was the greaty 1les his profession, that hit euod receipt Shall for my lYeee  hse sanctified By th' 1eediest stars in heaven; andgsC Inh uur honour But givmon leave to try success, I'gventure The well-lost life  T mine on his Grace's cureR le   toch a day and hour. COailtfESS. Dost thou belie,e't? HELENA. Ay, madaoioknowingly. COUNTE o'ih Fw , Helen, thou shalt inne my leave and love, Meaes and attendants, and my lovieg greetings To those of mine ? eyort. I'll stay at home, Bk pray God's blessing ias  s i   attempt. Be gone to-m hE sHmaed be sure of this, That I can help thee to thou shalunot miss. Exeunt p. 95iooegutsHIS ELECTRONstuTnpriIuthON OF THE SOMPLETE WORKS OF F A  C i f e'A AKESPErhrhrolLH tdPYRIGHT P o  90-1993 BY WOhf oD LIBRARY, INCq hxidt ISPROVIDEDWngbt iT alolECT GUTElwlisRG ETEXT OF IL uINOIS BENEDICTIkE COLLEGEWITH PEEMISSION. ELECTROpthC AND MACHINE RE;as;M oE COPIES MANHnrie;STRIBUTED S4 oONG AS SUCH COPstr'l e er hgohIrhrHtlerIgrddihS ahS nfHERSPERSsa eeT o USE ONLY, AN?hggo geuhIrhrl etdT DISTtf rOdrfED OR USEDCM etcERCIALLY. PROf IBITED COMMERCIbL DISTRIBUTION INt s oUDES BY ANYSERdwthCE THAT CHARGEHFOR DOWNLOAD TIMet lerW tlerul.sMBERSHThoid e flof;us t l lswSCEpis 1.Paris. The KINGA ol indeenFlourish of cornetcwEnter the KING with dijts young LORDS taking linnefor the Florentine war;WeriT .x tc and PAROLWhwoAoATTENDANTS KIlwo ihWdn,well, young lords l s ife war-like principlb Do not throw from you. Angyou, my lords, farewell; Fjgs ioadvice betwixt youth if both gain all, The gift a s yEtetch itself as 'tis redeiv'd, And is enough for bop. FIRST LORD. 'Tis oor hope, sir, After well-eet'red soldiers, to return Angfind your Grace in health.saolhcG. No, no, it cannot rn; and yet my heart Will not emefess he owes the malady Thaudoth my life besiege. Farehc ecmouung lords; Whether Llive or die, be you the sons O tsStthy Frenchmen; let higi1lsdk  - Those bated that aeherit but the fall Of the lac h mearchy-see that you comehcot to woo honour, but to wed as l soiv p. 96 The bravesuquestant shrinks, find whauyou seek, That fame may cro h uu aloud. I say farewellR oisCOND LORD. Healtsgdr your bidding, serve yoIoMajesty! KING. Thosyehnthtuf Italy, take heed otf iwhI They say our French lneed language to deny, If thi   demand; beware of being daptives Before you serve. frdTH. Our hearts receive yoor warnings. KING. FairN ecw[To ATTENDANshuiey Come hither to me. The ae lhcG retires attended FI,huts LORD. O my sweet lordgs inoyou will stay behind u.e ft eIrs nC oES. 'Tis noyihtTault, the spark. SEG al.eoLORD. O, 'tis bradgslaT! PAROLLES. IyPnaoenKwasn ol  inne seen or se wars. BERTRAM. I aooemoe aa ak here and kept a hm,hslc mC wu young' and nespoyear' and "Tis too earlosvu PAROLLES. An thyh ealmh:lbu 't, boy, steal ahde  hsravely. BERTRAMhm ytingmhK  here the forehorv to a smock, Creaking my hr es on the plain masonry, Ti eh r nour be bought up, and no . ord worn But one to dance .c ri By heaven, I'll steal ahde swFIRST LORD. Thisi os honour in the theft. PAhf nC oES. Commit it, CoOsswSECOND LORD. I aol  our accessary; and so faNhc ecwBERTRAM. I grot su you, and our parting is a s htSt'd body. FIRST LOhldt. Farewell, Captain.LisCOND LORD. Sweet si d ,a or Parolles! PARM oLES. Noble heroes, my sPtd and yours are kin. Good ,harks and lustrous, a word, euod metals: you shall find ?s ioregiment of the Spinii  dgLdnhtain Spurio, with hit eeijh.ce, an emblem of wat, here on his sinister cheekHheowas this very sword entrenh. od it. Say to him I live;da nubserve his reports for mri FIRST LORD. We shal ee noble Captain. PAROs  Shwoih l:T dote on you for sE novices! Exeunt LORvtuoFU slgehh g a sa  p. 9Dftdsnddsct the KING BEETRAM. Stay; the King- PAROLLES. Use a more  ehacious ceremony to the noblm e rds; you have restrain'dh uurself within the list of too em ika dUnu. Be more exptessive to them; for they wears iwsdMees in the cap of the taon; there do muster true gaitth eat, speak, and move, undiuthe influence of the most rehniv'd star; and though the drnil lead the measure, such arms  hse followed. After them,da nsdede a more dilated faretc ecwBERTRAM. And I w,gmn  so. PAROLLES. W htlh  Tellows; and like to ptove most sinewy sword-men.sttgnunt BERTRAM and P;rs nC oES Enter LAFEU S;TEU. [Kneeling] hoaele n, my lord, for me and  whomy tidings. KING. Ir ll fee thee to stand up. LAfhrinih fhen here's a man stancT inohas brought his pardontm mhuuld you had kneel'd, mo 4td, to ask me mercy; Angthat at my bidding you coulgso stand up. KING. I wou im yiea l  w  l  ienhsroke thy idre, And ask'd thee mercy lor't. LAFEU. Good faitre across! But, my good lordghutis thus: will you be cut'd Of your infirmity? Kswe' ihhco. LAFEU. O, w,gp uu eat No grapes, my roma Ah x? Yes, but you wilS ee  duble grapes, an if my i h dpTox Could reach them: l  inne seen a medicine That'tdesle to breathe life into a sSee, Quicken a rock, andh aede you dance canary p. 2lo  With spritely fire and mfhe n; whose simple touch Is b slE tol to araise King Pekdre nay, To give great Char ah aeaoa pen in's hand And wtite to her a love-line. KIiwo ih FU  iPE this? LAFh.nih Fw , Doctor She! My4td, there's one arriv'd, lT you will see her. Now, byh e  Taith and honour, If seri  osly I may convey my thougc t ld s ihth e  Ohe rodeliveranen, I have spoke With one thauin her sex, her years, profbsion, Wisdom, and constancosyinl de aegs'd me more Thae I dare blame my weakness. s eegp uu see her, For that is hiudemand, and know her busieess? That done, laugh well amon. KING. Now, good La vu, Bring in the admiratioe, that we with the May spend oor wonder too, or take off thiee By wond'ring how thou tooinust it. LAFEU. Nay, IS ehTit you, And not be all dao dc,lct. Exit LAFEU ?ING. Thus he his special eothing ever prologues. Revddsct LAFEU with HELEi,LS;TEU. Nay, come yoor ways. KING. This hastyinl sldz indeed. LAFE:hpcay, come your ways; Thrthroiht ljavsty; say your Na nsu him. A traitor you do , ok like; but such traitorsW is Majesty seldom fears. l de H e,ssid's uncle, That date leave two together. Fareh uu well. Exit KING. pmhsm :duone, does your busieess follow us? HELENA.h5, my good lord. Gerard dml:sfon was my father, In wsauhe did profess, well foundhph. 99 KING. I knew id hi HELENA. The ratherslgeh l  ,hare my praises towatds him; Knowing him is enoue ri On's bed of death Manyh,ceipts he gave me; chieflyune, Which, as the dearest istoe of his practice, And of hE old experience th' only datling, He bade me store up atdfh.ple eye, Safer than miee own two, more dear. I have wsapOlee hearing your high Iaiad Eo hrfuuch'd With thath akheddas  eat se wherein the gduur Of my dear father's gi 1Eaeds chief in power, I c h n to tender it, and my appl:ece, With all bound humbliifs. KING. We thank yoTmoaeiadWoBut may not be so he,dulous of cure, When our m  P adeved doctors leave us, aed The congregated college hadg emecluded That labourinh detocan never ransom nature tsrom her inaidable estate-I :   we must not So stain our Uudgment, or corrupt our hopre To prostitute our past-cute malady To empirics; or to aEsever so Our great self annuur credit to esteem A senselbs help, when help past senseslodeem. HELENA. My dul   then shall pay me for my pa?.h l slgehdu more enforce mUm Tfice on you; Humbly arEin.ng from your royal thooghts A modest one to bear me mack again. KING. I caaeot give thee less, to be callr d grateful. Thou thought'sosu help me; and such thanks sogive As one near death to thodothat wish him live. But whauat full I know, thou know'Peo part; I knowing all mo hheril, thou no art. HELEi,Ii What I can do can do no hort to try, p. 100 Sinceh uu set up your rest 'gainst eemedy. He that of greatest wlslrlhtTinisher Oft does themhsy the weakest minister. So r ly writ in babes hath judconnt shown, When judges havmfeen babes. Great floods hadgTlown From simple sourcb, and great seas have dried us,n miracles have by the greasbt been denied. Oft expedtation fails, and most oft thete Where most it promises; annuft it hits Where hope is coldbt, and despair most fits. ?ING. I must not hear theeR fare thee well, kind maid; fhy pains, not us'd, must bo s i  self be paid; Proffer lr t took reap thanks for theit reward. HELENA. Inskdsk merit so by breath is baer'd. It is not so with Him tdnoall things knows, As 'tisslc yos that square our guesshsy shows; But most it is prehomption in us when The help otoiUeen we count the act of mee. Dear sir, to my endeavourt ehene consent; Of heaven, eot me, make an experiment. l de lr t an impostor, that proekad ul,  vlf against the le,el of mine aim; But know Is idi agda ns idi n l hdnow mosusure, My art is not past po.Peor you past cure. KINC. Art thou so confident? WiIin what space Hop'st thou 8 et re? HELENA. The gNasbt Grace lending graceRh,, twice the horses of the sue shall bring Their fiery torh.1iht aPtnal ring, Ere tw.v in murk and occidental daoeh Moist Hesperus hath quaNh'd his sleepy lamp, Or f  or and twenty times the pilotCueOettW ath told the thievihmoeaSsb how they pass, Whathrldrsirm from your sound patts shall fly, Health shall ladgTree, and sickness freely aDi p. 101 KING. q r n thy certainty and confidiNe What dar'st thou ventuiraoW ELENA. Tax of impodence, A strumpet's boldnbs, a divulged shame, Traduheud by odious ballads; my ma.adhus name Sear'd otherwrv; ne worse of worst-extendk With vilest torture let myOgv be ended. KING. Mepinks in thee some blessed spatit doth speak His powerfuSh und within an organ weak;hOlboinoimpossibility wou.mhda   In common sense, sense jees another way. Thy life E dear; for all that life cae rate Worth name of life in thiohath estimate: Youth, bea  ty, wisdom, courage, all Tsauhappiness and prime can halhhy call. Thou this to hazatd needs must intimate Skilwinfinite or monstrous despeiasri Sweet practiser, thy pso ,it l slgehshw , That minislRT idioown death if I die. tTttuENA. If I break timre or flinch in property Of t inoI spoke, unpitied let me aDI And well deserv'd. N s  itd id0yainlhus my fee;  lt t, if I help, what do you btomise me? KING. Make Iy demand. HELENA. Bumhhegp uu make it even? KTlwo ihh5, by my sceptre angmy hopes of heaven. HELEi,Ii Then shalt thou give me .c mIy kingly hand What husraa nhaothy power I will comkalei Exempted be from me tioarrogance To choose from flsI the royal blood of Francre My low and humble name to iht pagate With any branch orhn a,guf thy state; But suchdSee, thy vassal, whom I kn so l tTree for me to ask, thee r  bestow. p. 102 KINC. Here is my hand; the premEes observ'd, Thy will by oe  hherformance shall be ser,'d. So make the choice of tho uwn time, for I, Thy resol,'d patient, on thee still relmhm emte should I question thite and more I must, Though mlsms  hdnow could not be more toshChte From whence thou camr st, how tended on. But rest qrac gE, n'd welcome and uedoubted blest. Give me some itd yiEre ho! If thou procalpTuihe mntsStd, my deed sha ehh arch thy deed. [FlourEh. Exeunt]ACT II. St hrecE 2.Rousillon. The SOUNT'S palaceEnter Csna,cTESS and CLOWN Csna,cTESS. Come on, sir; l  tingkuw put you to the heih roof your breeding. CLOWl.h l slgeh tr w myself highlo Ted and lowly taught. I knfoh e  hsusiness is but to the co  rt. COUNTESS. To the dourt! Why, what place makmouu special, when you put oob that with such contempt? fr t to the court! CLOWN. sc oly, madam, if God have liroa man any manners, he maycn,ed   put it off at court. CmIat cannot make a leg, putuff's cap, kiss his hand, aed say nothing, has neither lehsyiaks, lip, nor cap; andhalagn toch a fellow, to say btecisely, were not for the coIttI but for me, I have an an i er will serve all men. COq etsESS. Marry, that's nhsountiful answer that fits a,hsneoestions. CLOWN. IthrBvde a barber's chair, tsaufits all buttocks-the pie buttock, the quatch buttohed, the brawn buttock, or aey buttock. COUNTESSv Bgehh uur answer serve fit w dY questions? p. 103Ls oOWN. As fit as ten groaT is for the hand of an attorni  , as your French crown for ouur taffety punk, as Tib'thCsofor Tom's forefingerwdtlehhancake for Shrove Tubday, a morris for Mayday, nts ionail to his hole, the cucle ld to his horn, as a scoldinh sneoean to a wrangling knavre as the nun's lip to the friat's mouth; nay, as the puddieg to his skin. COUNTES oihW ave you, I, say, an anclP T such fitness for all 7 gE, ns? CLOWN. From rnlow your duke to beneath yoIoconstable, it will fit anysneoestion. COUNTESS.  ht must be an answer of most mlbtrous size that must fit al mawdalrihLs oOWN. But a stifle neither, in good faithwhes the learned should speak lLth of it. Here it is, and al b inobelongs to't. Ask me ,s I am a courtier: it shall d  h uu no harm to learn. COUltfESS. To be young againghes we could, I will be a fo;haoquestion, hoping to be pe wiser by your answer. I ksao h uu, sir, are you a court7sa  CLOWN. O Lord, siidoies tiEi os a simple puttine uff. More, more, a hundregof them. COUNTESS. Sat, I am a poor friend of youmhe that loves you. CLOWNv lm oord, sir!-Thick, threed; spare not me. COUNMt''ih l s idi ag ,nte you cae eat none of this homely meat.Ls oOWN. O Lord, sir!-l:  , put me to't, I warranth uu. COUNTESS. You .Em ae,ly whipp'd, sir, as l s idi ahA  tuOWN. O Lordn sir!-Spare not me. COq etsESS. Do you cry 'O W hlee sir!' at your whippieg, and 'spare not me'? Indilp uur 'O Lord, sir!' ihseery sequent to your whipp?eswYou would answer very ec ehsu a whipping, if you wismfut bound to't. CLOWNhm mee'er had worse luck in 8Ogv in my 'O Lord, sir-' I see thing's may serve loeg, but not serve ever. COq etsESS. I play the noble s  osewife with the time, To enlEsa?heoso merrily with a fo Mwp. 104 CLOWN. O S hlee sir!-Why, there't dEdgtsltgk,deati COUNTewo'ihhOoend, sir! To yourhsusiness: give Helen this,hOlm hlloher to a present ans.Pfack; Commend me to my inafmen and my son. This is nf h t ch. CLOWN. Not much emoe nndation to them? COUltfESS. Not much employmirofor you. You understand on? CLOWN. Most fruitfWk  ; I am there before my lee .hLs adiltfESS. Haste y  o again. ExeuntACT II.L'hrecE 3.Paris. The KlhcG'S palaceEnter BEETRAM, LAFEU, and PAhf nC oES LAFEU. They sao h enqhdf are past; and we inne our philosophical perslb to make modern and familiat things supernatural and cnoseless. Hence is it that we mala sh.fles of terrors, enscoecing ourselves into seeming lat wledge when we should subNr ourselves to an unknown fiashbt eIrs nC oES. Why, AsE the rarest argument of wonaiuthat hath shot out in our latsiutimes. BERTRAM. Angso 'tis. LAFEU. To be rrddrac hr. od of the artists3PAROLLES. So I say-rmI of Galen and Paracelsu ih S;TEU. Of all the leaieed and authentic fellows- w eIrs nC oES. Right; so I :  . LAFEU. That gave hioC s haltorable- PAROLs st'ih Fw , there 'tis; so sao  l suo. LAFEU. Not to byitd i od- PAROLLES. tl.ortI as 'twere a man assurCeuf a- LAFEU. Uncerta?Ogv and sure death. PA,s nC oES. Just; you say tc egl  w sC In l  inne said. bhbt hgtlo  S;TEU. I may lLly say it is a novelty to thesStld. PAROLLES. It rthalagahm rs you will have iohaoshowing, you shall read ithaowhat-do-ye-call't heNhm oAFEU. [Reading tdoballad title] 'A Showine uf a Heavenly Effect in ae Earthly Actor.' PAROLShwoih fhat's it; I would hadg :hns iovery same. LAFh.nih Fw , your dolphin is n s Iostier. 'Fore me, I spealpaorespect- PAROLLEt ihhcay, 'tis strange, 'tisseery strange; that is the brirs and the tedious of it; and si os of a most facinerious spitit that will not acknowledgm,oto be the- LAFEU. Viso  iak of heaven. PAROLShwoihh5; so I say. LAFe.nih ld dl h st weak- PARlruLES. And debile minisvr, great power, great transhnndence; which should, indek, give us a further use to beh aKs iama e ne the recov'ryuf the King, as to be- LASEU. Generally thankfulRhD,r KING, HELENAwda nhT tfENDANTS PAEOLLES. I would have saidhetI you say well. Here comets ioKing. LAFEU. Lust.fmnts ioDutchman says. Ir ll like a maid the better, ws,h1l  inne a tooth in my headtm fw , he's able to lead her a emtanto. PAROLLES. Mlsudu vinaigre! Is not this tM adsa  LAFEU. 'Fore Cod, I think so. KING. G syeaY before me all the lorcIaocourt. Exit an ATTEpiewlltf Sit, my preserver,hsy thy patient's side; Andslc mIis healthful hand, whosmfanish'd sense Thou has repind od, a second time receive fhe confirmation of my promn,ud gift, Which but attendss i   naming. p. 106 Entiuthree or four LORDS Fait maid, send forth thine eye. fhis youthful parcel Of nob a hsachelors stand at my bestfld0ylnuer whom both sovere.lmluwer and father's voicyl  inne to use. Thy frank eleerion make; Thou hast powersu choose, and they none to forda ari HELENA. To each ol you one fair and virtuous mi rress Fall, when love pleasni Marry, to each but one! W;TEU. I'd give bay Cubdpda n ihtTurniture My moup no more were broken than thev boys', And writ as little feard. KING. Peruse theAhc ecwNot one of those but hnndlr ble father. HELENAhA  ddsOwddsm Bdiiv hath theough me restor'd the King to i?elswALL. We understangit, and thank heaven for youeA fttuENA. I am a simple oaeiee and therein wealthiest ssU  l hhrotest I simply am a kniei Please it your Majesl  , I have done already. The flushes in my cheeks thus whislct me: 'We blush that thou  1oldst choose; but, be refuvd, Let the white death sit on Iy cheek for ever, We'll na oer come there again.' KIiwo ih l: ayeP.v and see: ust  shuns thy love shuns all hiulove in me. HELENA. Noesmdtian, from thy altar do ITly, And to imperial Love,s inogod most high, Do my sigb stream. Sir, will you heat my suit? FIRST LORDtpOlmp:toit. HELENA. fhanks, sir; all the rest is ot te. LAFEU. I had rathee be in this choice than throw aons-ace for my life. HELt,cA. The honour, sir, that llames in your fair eyes, p. tohg.erWaTore I speak, too oisinwoningly replies. Lovmoaede your fortunes twenty tions above Her that so wishes,da n i1'mble love! SECOl.eoLORD. No better, il you please. HELENA. Myslhtmteceive, Which great u ove grant; and so I take myOUee. LAFEU. Do all thi   deny her? An they were sonhuf mine I'd have them whiptth or I would send them to th' ut rk to make eunuchs of. HESh,cA. Be not afraid that Lyour hand should take; I'lwnever do you wrong for your fly: ari Blessing upon yout vows; and in your bed Fingfairer fortune, if you ever hgadooS;TEU. These boys ate boys of ice; they'll nonyinne her. Sure, they are bacdelrfu the English; the FriNh ne'er got 'em. HELEpeIi You are too young, too halhhy, and too good, To make m  orself a son out of my bloodR fOURTH LORD. Fair lite I think not so. LAFE7wThere's one grape yet; I aootore thy father drunk winealfut if thou be'st not an assn I am a youth of fourteen; I inne known thee already. HwtuENA. [To BERTRAO] I dare not say I take youth but I give Me and my servren, ever whilst I live, Intoh uur guiding power. This iuthe man. KING. Why, thee, young Bertram, take her; tiwos thy wife. BERTRAIih l,  slgv, my liege! I sha ehhseseech your Highness, Ie such a business give me lea,e to use The help of mine own emb. KING. Know'st thoudut, Bertram, What she has doee for me? BERTRAM. Yb, my good lord; But never s hhe to know why I should marey her. KING. Thou know'1tiohas rais'd me from my s.,dly bed. BERTRAM. fr t follows it, my lord, to being me down Must answer for m  or raising? I know her wel eaehh. 108 She had her beeeding at my father's chargri A poor physician's daughsiumy wife! Disdain Rathaucorrupt me ever! KINGepuTis only title thou disdaie'st in her, the which I can A hehn op. Strange is it that o  r bloods, Of colour, weigh.oand heat, pour'd all togetdEg ; uld quite confound drE?erion, yet stand off In d,sferences so mighty. If shehse All that is virtuous-savmh inothou dislik'st, A pooe physician's daughter-thou aElik'st Of virtue for thmeame; but do not so. From lflft place when virtuous thiegs proceed, The place is diceified by the doer's deed; There great additions swell'swda nseirtue none, It is a droi ,a n r nour. Good alone Is g ud without a name. Vilenesshrowsam tioproperty by whatheois should go, Not by the tiBri She is young, wise, faiA yld s ife to nature she's imk a:syi.r; And these breed r nour. That is honour's scoie Which challenges itself as s duur's born And is not likmIe sire. Honours thrive Whamtather from our acts we them ais,ne Than our fore-goersP tiomere word's a slave, Defauch'd on every tomb, on e,ery grave A lying trophy; aed as oft is dumb Where dust aed damn'd oblivion is the tooes Of honour'd bones indeedtm fU  tr uld be said? If thoo canst like this creature as nh aeiee I can create the rest.snNetSmaed she Is her own do.E l  r nour and wealth from mri BERTRAM. I cannot loag iEgdur will strive to do AshbaolhcG. Thou wrong'st pyself, if thou shouldst stri,e to choose. HELENA. Thauyou are well restor'd, my l hlee I'm glad. Let the rest hu. p. 109 KING. My r nour's at the stake; whichsu defeat, I must produce my luwer. Here, take her hand,st et ud scornful boy, unwortso s iht euod gift, That dost ie vile misprision shackle up l,  4dgda n i1abert; that eaa Peot dream We, poising uthaoher defective scale, Sha ehsl.gh thee to the beam; thauwilt not know It is in us to b aatothine honour where We pliev to have it grow. Check tso  emetempt; Obey our willwsoihewshUeails in thy good;WaOdtne not thy disdain, bumlh,sently Do thine own fortOgts inoobedient right Whichhsoth thy duty owes and our potct claims; Or I will throw pee from my care for ever InGIe staggers and the carelesulapse Of youth and ignorancrI both my revenge and hate W using upon thee in the name ol justice, Without all terms  T pity. Speak; thine ans.EhA nriT .x tc. Pardon, oe   ehqcyos lord; for I suboeeoMy fancy to your eyes. Liv I consider What great creas, n and what dole of honour fhddf where you bid it, I fingthat she which late Was in mydubler thoughts most base is nfo fhe praised of the King; h r , so ennobled, Is as 'tweimforn so. KING. Take hee by the hand, And tell her shehrf iditI to whom I promise b counterpoise, if not to thy ecdre A balance more repleteR lisRTRAM. I take her haed. KING. Good fortune aed the favour of the King Sm,doupon this contract; whose enremony Shall seem expediiroon the now-born brief, bnd be perform'd to-night. fhe solemn feast p. 110 F?ehh mte attend upon the comieg space, Expecting abseet friends. As thou lov'st hebyfhy love's to me religiousth else, does err. Exeunt al;sut LAFEU and PAROLs st'for  stay behind, commens?e uf this wedding LAFE7wDo you hear, monsieur? b word with you. PAROLLE oihhge ur pleasure, sir? LrhTEU. Your lord and mastet did well to make his recantas, n. PAROLLES. Recaetation! My Lord! my mastisdooS;TEU. Ay; is it nf dBaeguage I speak? PAws nC oES. A most harsh one, aed not to be understood withouubloody succeeding. My massisdooS;TEU. Are you coYdahe n to the Count Rousilloe? PAROLLES. To any c  ont; to all counts; to what nth aaswLAFEU. To what is eyont's man: count's mastet is of another style. PARM oLES. You are too old, sii l Otoit satisfy you, you aresuo old.aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa